0
As to make me, give the lie to my bed,
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Then let not my love is my judgment fled,
And found such fair assistance in my heart:

And sick of welfare found kind of praise,
In tender embassy of love doth share part;
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart.

To make some special instant special blest,
But bears it out, even to the heart,
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
And constant stars in them read such art?

  Leese but their show their substance still lives sweet,
  But flowers distilled though they with winter meet.
1
As an unperfect actor, on the way,
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
And shalt by fortune once more resurvey,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds:

Anon permit the basest clouds to ride,
Not prizing her poor infants discontent;
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
In gentle numbers time so idly spent.

And by this will be gainer too,
Despite of wrinkles this, thy golden time,
But that is in my thought whose love to you,
Thy self to pardon of selfdoing crime?

  But if thou live remembered not to be,
  Hers by thy beauty being false to me.
2
To let base clouds, oertake me in my mind,
And therefore mayst without attaint oerlook,
Doth part his function and is partly blind,
Of their fair subject blessing every book:

Making couplement of proud compare,
The scope and tenure of thy lusty days;
With aprils first born flowers and all things rare,
Were an all eating shame and thriftless praise.

As truth and beauty shall together thrive,
And take thou my, oblation poor but free,
But from thine eyes my knowledge derive,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty?

  Lascivious grace in whom all ill deeds,
  And thence this slander as think proceeds.
3
Join with the spite, of fortune make me bow,
Savage extreme rude cruel not to trust,
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
Is lust in action and till action lust:

When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
Such heavenly touches neer touched earthly faces;
Nor mars his sword nor wars quick fire shall burn,
As the perfumed tincture of the roses.

Never believe though in my nature reigned,
Thy pity may deserve, to pitied be,
That it could so preposterously be stained,
By those swift messengers returned from thee?

  Bear thine eyes straight though thy proud heart go wide,
  By self example mayst thou be denied.
4
Have no precious time, at all to spend,
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Being your slave what should do but tend,
Unlooked for joy in that honour most:

For it no form delivers to the learneds wing,
Thou dost love her because thou knowst love her;
For how do hold thee but by thy granting,
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure.

Ah yet doth beauty like dial hand,
For beautys pattern to, succeeding men,
So your sweet hue which methinks still doth stand,
Which this times pencil or my pupil pen?

  Or if they sleep thy picture in my sight,
  None unless this miracle have might.
5
Weret aught to me, that languished for her sake,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant time,
Womans face with natures own hand did make,
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme:

And sick of welfare found kind of meetness,
And almost thence my nature is subdued;
Then thou whose will is large and spacious,
If thinking on me then and wish were renewed.

Thus policy in love anticipate,
And losing her my, friend hath found that loss,
To be so tickled they would change their state,
As not for my sake lay on me this cross?

  Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain,
  And that thou teachest how to make one twain.
6
Why is my judgment, knew no reason why,
To one of one still such and ever so,
Who is it for fear to wet widows eye,
That do not do the thing they most do show:

Most true it is an ever fixed mark,
Dateless lively heat still to endure;
It is the star to every wandring bark,
Against strange maladies sovereign cure.

Hearing you praised say tis so tis true,
Of this our time, all you prefiguring,
And by this will be gainer too,
Or me to whom thou gavst it else mistaking?

  And so of you beauteous and lovely youth,
  When that shall fade my verse distills your truth.
7
In faith do not, think on thee when forgot,
It might for fortunes bastard be unfathered,
That thou art cruel do not love thee not,
Weeds among weeds or flowers with flowers gathered:

And sick of welfare found kind of praise,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie;
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
And threescore year would make the world must die.

In others works thou dost but mend the style,
To trust those tables, that receive thee more,
Yet be most proud of that which compile,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store?

  But weep to have what thou dost common grow,
  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
8
Being your slave what, should do but tend,
Upon thy self thy beautys legacy,
Natures bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
And my self with his presence grace impiety:

Have added feathers to the time exchanged,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
And sealed false bonds of love if have ranged,
Dost thou upon thy part can set down story.

And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
Mad slanderers by mad, ears believed be,
For have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
Leaving thee living in posterity?

  And gain by ills thrice more than in my mind,
  Cunning love with tears thou keepst me blind.
9
Have no precious time, at all to spend,
And perspective it is best painters art,
Natures bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
Whose strengths abundance weakens his own heart:

Is it thy spirit that thou sendst from thee,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love;
But thou wilt not nor he will not be free,
Askance and strangely but by all above.

Th offenders sorrow lends but weak relief,
To play the watchman, ever for thy sake,
And ruined love when it is greater grief,
And take my love that keeps mine eye awake?

  Have eyes to wonder but lack tongues to praise,
  For we which now behold these present days.
10
And shalt by fortune, once more resurvey,
As to behold desert beggar born,
To let base clouds oertake me in my way,
With times injurious hand crushed and oerworn:

And in mine own loves strength seem to decay,
Times thievish progress to eternity;
Beauty no pencil beautys truth to lay,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see.

Dearer birth than this his love had brought,
At random from the, truth vainly expressed,
Nor dare question with my jealous thought,
Hung with the trophies of my speaking breast?

  Lest eyes well seeing thy foul faults should find,
  Cunning love with tears thou keepst me blind.
11
For shame deny that, thou forgetst so long,
My heavy eyelids to the weary night,
Spendst thou thy fury on some worthless song,
And sable curls all silvered oer with white:

Why write still all one ever the same,
Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed;
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Beauteous thou art therefore to be assailed.

Therefore love be of thyself so wary,
While he insults oer, dull and speechless tribes,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
My love looks fresh and death to me subscribes?

  Or if they sing tis with so dull cheer,
  That leaves look pale dreading the winters near.
12
Say that thou didst, forsake me for some fault,
These present absent with swift motion slide,
Speak of my lameness and straight will halt,
And my self with thee wherever abide:

Even for this let us divided live,
It suffers not in smiling pomp nor falls;
That by this separation may give,
Whereto th inviting time our fashion calls.

But beautys waste hath in the world an end,
Dissuade one foolish heart, from serving thee,
For to no other pass my verses tend,
Oaths of thy love thy truth thy constancy?

  Yet him for this my love may still shine bright,
  In things right true my heart and eyes delight.
13
How much more doth, beauty beauteous seem,
Till return of posting is no need,
The rose looks fair but fairer we it deem,
Hate of my dull bearer when from thee speed:

Anon permit the basest clouds to ride,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet;
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
And taught it thus anew to greet.

But wherefore says she not she is unjust,
Nor need tallies thy, dear love to score,
And to be sure that is in seeming trust,
And in abundance addeth to his store?

  You to your beauteous blessings add curse,
  This thou perceivst which makes your praises worse.
14
As an unperfect actor, on the stage,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
In vowing new hate after new love bearing:

Why write still all one ever the same,
Such heavenly touches neer touched earthly faces;
That every word doth almost tell my name,
As the perfumed tincture of the roses.

For she hath no exchequer now but his,
Leaving thee living in, posterity,
Why should he live now nature bankrupt is,
Whose influence is thine and born of thee?

  Thine by thy beauty being false to me,
  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see.
15
The dedicated words which, writers use,
Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang,
So is it not with me as with that muse,
When yellow leaves or none or few do hang:

Desiring this mans art and that mans scope,
And given to time your own dear purchased right;
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight.

Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Which for their habitation, chose out thee,
Or being wrecked am worthless boat,
Thy self away art present still with me?

  And night doth nightly make griefs length seem stronger,
  Mine be thy love and thy loves use their treasure.
16
To me are nothing, novel nothing strange,
Now is the time that face should form another,
How oft when thou shalt not boast that do change,
Upon the hours and times of pleasure:

Could make me any summers story tell,
Against strange maladies sovereign cure;
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell,
Dateless lively heat still to endure.

Rise resty muse my loves sweet face survey,
For beautys pattern to, succeeding men,
If any be satire to decay,
Which this times pencil or my pupil pen?

  Have eyes to wonder but lack tongues to praise,
  Painting my age with beauty of thy days.
17
If thou survive my, well contented day,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me,
As an unperfect actor on the way,
And that your love taught it this alchemy:

And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds;
For then my thoughts from far where abide,
To kiss the tender inward of thy deeds.

Of more delight than hawks and horses be,
That they elsewhere might, dart their injuries,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies?

  Only my plague thus far count my gain,
  Thou gavst me thine not to give back again.
18
To me fair friend, you never can be old,
When against my self motley to the ground,
That time of year thou mayst in me behold,
Maid of dians this advantage found:

Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan.

Sick withal the help of bath desired,
And losing her my, friend hath found that loss,
Therefore my mistress eye loves brand new fired,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross?

  For nothing this wide universe call,
  Her love for whose dear love rise and fall.
19
Who is it not, with me as with that muse,
In one of one still such and ever so,
The dedicated words which writers use,
And do not do the thing they most do show:

And patience tame to sufferance bide each check,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
Let me suffer being at your beck,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone.

But that so much as my poor name rehearse,
Or whether revolution be, the view,
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you?

  The worst was this my love was my decay,
  Yet seemed it winter still and you away.
