0
Those hours that with, gentle work did frame,
Am of my self am mortgaged to thy will,
Is perjured murdrous bloody full of blame,
The worser spirit woman coloured ill:

Show me your image in some antique book,
And long entreaty soften her hard heart;
That record could with backward look,
How can then be elder than thou art.

No bitterness that will bitter think,
That due of many, lives upon his gains,
Whilst like willing patient will drink,
Beggared of blood to blush through lively veins?

  But weep to have what thou dost common grow,
  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
1
Why with the spite, of fortune make me bow,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify,
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
And dig deep trenches in thy breast doth lie:

Three april perfumes in three hot junes burned,
Not prizing her poor infants discontent;
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned,
Lose all and more by paying too much rent.

That little that am and they that level,
Return of love more, blest may be deceived,
May be straight though they themselves be bevel,
Steal from his figure and no pace perceived?

  Thus do pine and surfeit day by day,
  Or call it winter still and you away.
2
When days oppression is, not all my grief,
And found such fair assistance in my verse,
Fair eyes the mirror of my wailing chief,
And under thee their poesy disperse:

When rocks impregnable are not my measure,
Past reason hunted and no sooner had;
And so the general of hot desire,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad.

Now all is done have what shall have no end,
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before,
But being both from me both to each friend,
Most sorts of men do set but little store?

  But when your countenance filled up his line,
  Then lacked matter that enfeebled mine.
3
Then let not my, love is my judgment fled,
And dig deep trenches in thy breast doth lie,
To let base clouds oertake me in my head,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify:

Why should poor beauty indirectly seek,
Were an all eating shame and thriftless praise;
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
Against the wrackful siege of battring days.

That little that am and they that level,
Thou usurer that putst, forth all to use,
May be straight though they themselves be bevel,
So him lose through my unkind abuse?

  Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
  Being had to triumph being lacked to hope.
4
Through the sweet music, which his harp did make,
And what ist but mine own when praise thee,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
And my self with his presence grace impiety:

Now stand you on the finger of throned queen,
Wooing his purity with her foul pride;
So are those errors that in thee are seen,
Be anchored in the breath that from my side.

And found it in thy heart that when it grows,
With others thou shouldst, in bounty cherish,
Be it lawful love thee as thou lovst those,
Harsh featureless and rude barrenly perish?

  But found no cure the bath for my help lies,
  There faith doth fearless dwell in lovers eyes.
5
Through the sweet music, which his harp did make,
Then orpheus with his fair doth rehearse,
Penelope for her ulysses sake,
It is so grounded inward in my verse:

Sweet is the star to every wandring bark,
But best is best if never intermixed;
Most true it is an ever fixed mark,
Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed.

Both find each other and lose both twain,
Slandering creation with false, esteem,
If lose thee my loss is my loves gain,
Before joy proposed behind dream?

  My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue,
  Incapable of more replete with you.
6
Or if they have, where is my judgment fled,
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
To let base clouds oertake me in my head,
Unlooked for joy in that honour most:

That use is not forbidden usury,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;
But why of two oaths breach do accuse thee,
Is poorly imitated after you.

When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Beated and chopt with, tanned antiquity,
Loves best habit is in my self respect,
Thou of thy love thy truth thy constancy?

  And speak her good though she requite it ill,
  You still shall live and my loud crying still.
7
Lo in the chronicle, of wasted time,
And do not drop in for an after loss,
When behold the violet past prime,
Witness the world is bent my deeds to cross:

Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the shore;
For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
Increasing store with loss and loss with store.

Be where you list your charter is so strong,
And play the watchman, ever for thy sake,
To what you will to you it doth belong,
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake?

  And my hearts right thy inward love of me,
  So long lives this and this shall ever be.
8
Where art thou muse, that thou forgetst so long,
My tongue tied patience with too much disdain,
Spendst thou thy fury on some worthless song,
That thy unkindness lays upon my pain:

With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad;
As on the top of happy hours,
Past reason hunted and no sooner had.

To what you will to you it doth belong,
By new unfolding his, imprisoned pride,
Be where you list your charter is so strong,
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride?

  As she doth laugh at her in equal sort,
  Cease then mine eyes due is thy good report.
9
And will thy image, should keep open,
That thou consumst thy self in single life,
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
Of the world will wail thee like makeless wife:

To make of monsters and things indigest,
Whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never;
Sweet is thy virtue as thy self deceivest,
Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure.

Thus policy in love anticipate,
And losing her my, friend hath found that loss,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross?

  And yet by heaven think my love you know,
  Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe.
10
But not to tell, of good or evil luck,
For as you were when first your eye eyed,
Not from the stars do my judgement pluck,
So dost thou too and therein dignified:

For where is she so fair whose uneared womb,
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own;
You are my all the world will be the tomb,
That due to thee which thou deservst alone.

Take heed therefore mine eyes be blessed made,
Lest my bewailed guilt, should do thee shame,
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Or whether revolution be the same?

  As with your shadow with these did play,
  Or gluttoning on all or all away.
11
That thou art cruel, do not think on thee,
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
Since brass nor stone nor earth nor boundless sea,
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell:

They rightly do inherit heavens graces,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace;
My saucy bark inferior far to his,
With ugly rack on his celestial face.

And tongues to be your being shall rehearse,
With others thou shouldst, not abhor my state,
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
But shoot not at me in your wakened hate?

  Being had to triumph being lacked to hope,
  Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope.
12
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
That from the forests shook three summers pride,
What potions have drunk of siren tears,
For as you were when first your eye eyed:

But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed;
Then being asked where all thy beauty lies,
Torment thrice three fold thus to be assailed.

Then can no horse with my desire keep pace,
Save what is had, or must from you be took,
As those two mourning eyes become thy face,
And can no more endure on them to look?

  Pity the world well knows yet none knows well,
  To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
13
Say that thou didst, forsake me for some fault,
Coral is far more red than her lips red,
Speak of my lameness and straight will halt,
If hairs be wires black wires grow on her head:

And happy lines on which with starry light,
And do whateer thou wilt swift footed time;
Are vanishing or vanished out of sight,
And thou presentst pure unstained prime.

And tongues to be sure that is not false swear,
Save where you are, how happy you make those,
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
Where you may be or your affairs suppose?

  Prepare yourself new love to thee so belong,
  To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
14
Womans face with natures, own hand did make,
Of the world will wail thee like makeless wife,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
That thou consumst thy self in single life:

For whether beauty birth or wealth or wit,
For precious friends hid in deaths dateless night;
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
Oercharged with burthen of mine own loves might.

Carve not with his brief hours and weeks,
Of others voices that, my adders sense,
Loves not times fool though rosy lips and cheeks,
Mark how with my neglect do dispense?

  So return rebuked to my content,
  When tyrants crests and tombs of brass are spent.
15
Join with the spite, of fortune make me bow,
When all the day they view things unrespected,
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
And darkly bright are bright in dark directed:

Simply credit her false speaking tongue,
At the woods boldness by thee blushing stand;
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Stealing away the treasure of thy hand.

But all alone stands hugely politic,
If ten of thine, ten times refigured thee,
It fears not policy that heretic,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be?

  This thou perceivst which makes your praises worse,
  You to your beauteous blessings add curse.
16
Clouds and eclipses stain, both moon and sun,
And yet methinks have astronomy,
And will thy image should keep open,
Beyond all date even to eternity:

That use is not forbidden usury,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept;
Thats for thy self the thanks if aught in me,
Desire is death which physic did except.

Ay me but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
To guard the lawful, reasons on thy face,
Who lead thee in their riot even there,
And there to rest themselves did boldly place?

  As any she belied with false compare,
  To be deaths conquest and make worms thine heir.
17
Not from the stars, do my judgement pluck,
Sweets with sweets war not joy delights in joy,
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Or else receivst with pleasure thine annoy:

But only that is permanent and free,
To weigh how once suffered in your crime;
Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
Thy worth the greater being wooed of time.

Where beautys veil doth cover every blot,
Whilst he upon your, soundless deep doth ride,
Yet shoot ye sharply still and spare me not,
And that in guess they measure by thy side?

  To make him seem long hence as he shows now,
  Yet do thy office muse teach thee how.
18
Sits down to rest, him in some shady place,
Who for thy self thy beautys legacy,
Then let not winters ragged hand deface,
Of plagues of dearths or seasons quality:

Me from my self disgrace knowing thy will,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill,
The very refuse of thy husbandry.

Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
Leaving thee living in, posterity,
Mark how one string sweet husband to another,
Delights to peep to gaze therein on thee?

  How like eves apple doth thy beauty grow,
  Towards thee ill run and give him leave to go.
19
Thy beauty and thy, years full well befits,
To thy sweet will making addition thus,
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
And will to boot and will in over plus:

For where is she so fair whose uneared womb,
Although she knows my days are past the best;
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
Deaths second self that seals up all in rest.

Therefore my mistress eye loves brand new fired,
And take thou my, oblation poor but free,
Love to you as you to me then tendered,
Made for to be divine and born of thee?

  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me,
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee.
20
Is perjured murdrous bloody, full of blame,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify,
Thou blind fool love what dost thou make the shame,
And dig deep trenches in thy breast doth lie:

Fair soil it seems from far where abide,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Times thievish progress to eternity.

Whether we are mended or whether better they,
That music hath far, more pleasing sound,
Against the stormy gusts of winters day,
My mistress when she walks treads on the ground?

  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so,
  But heavy tears badges of eithers woe.
21
The dedicated words which, writers use,
Sits mourning for the absence of her face,
As to make me give the lie to my muse,
Thy looks with me thy heart in other place:

Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
Of thee thy record never can be missed;
Or at the least so long as brain and heart,
Have faculty by nature to subsist.

The coward conquest of wretchs knife,
More than that tongue, that more hath more expressed,
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
Look ever lovely as becomes you best?

  That can see thou lovst me for my help lies,
  Than both your poets can in praise devise.
22
Tis better to be, vile than vile esteemed,
Then orpheus with his fair doth rehearse,
And the just pleasure lost which is so deemed,
While thou dost breathe that pourst into my verse:

Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine;
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine.

Bliss in proof and proved very woe,
The one doth shadow, of your beauty show,
Die to themselves sweet roses do not so,
That thou among the wastes of time must go?

  How like eves apple doth thy beauty grow,
  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
23
So shall those blots, that do with me remain,
Lest guilty of my love or thy dear merit,
Let me confess that we two must be twain,
While shadows like to thee my true spirit:

All men make faults and even in this,
Yet field and bower are full of her hue;
My self corrupting salving thy amiss,
And you in grecian tires are painted new.

For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
Nor draw no lines, there with thine antique pen,
And art made tongue tied by authority,
For beautys pattern to succeeding men?

  Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
  Ere you were born was beautys summer dead.
24
The dedicated words which, writers use,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
As fast as thou art too dear for my muse,
That do not drop in for an after loss:

And patience tame to sufferance bide each check,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
Let me suffer being at your beck,
Without accusing you of injury.

Alas why fearing of times tyranny,
Whilst that this shadow, doth such substance give,
Therefore love be of thyself so wary,
To leave for nothing all thy glory live?

  Make thee another self for love of you,
  Hate from hate away she threw.
25
Why is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste,
If my dear love were but the child of state,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste:

So for fear of trust forget to say,
As soon as think the place where he would be;
My soul doth tell my body that he may,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

Look what thy memory cannot contain,
Presents thy shadow to, my sightless view,
Carve not with thy hours my loves gain,
That you for love speak well of me untrue?

  All men are bad and in their badness reign,
  That endless pleasure shall unto me gain.
26
May still seem love, to me though altered new,
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
Joy of my life full oft for loving you,
For term of life thou art the fairest wights:

An eye more bright than theirs less false in rolling,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine;
Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing,
That in my will no fair acceptance shine.

Dearer birth than this his love had brought,
More than that tongue, that more hath more expressed,
Then can no horse with my jealous thought,
Through contemplation of my speaking breast?

  All losses are restored and sorrows end,
  But if the while think on thee dear friend.
27
When in the chronicle, of wasted time,
And darkly bright are bright in dark directed,
When behold the violet past prime,
When all the day they view things unrespected:

Let me suffer being at your beck,
When thou thy self dost give invention light;
And patience tame to sufferance bide each check,
To know my shames and praises from your sight.

To be so tickled they would change their state,
And folly doctor like, controlling skill,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
And captive good attending captain ill?

  That for thy sweet love whilst it is abused,
  And their gross painting might be better used.
28
Is it thy will, thy image should keep open,
In what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose,
No more be grieved at that which thou hast done,
And tread my life down in the fragrant rose:

So are those errors that in your report,
Loves eye is not so true as all mens no;
How far modern quill doth come too short,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.

Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
Can comfort me but, her own joyous sight,
Thus policy in love but truly write,
At first the very worst of fortunes might?

  And speak her good though she requite it ill,
  No love toward others in that one will.
29
Let those who are, in favour with their stars,
When not to be receives reproach of being,
Whilst whom fortune of such triumph bars,
In vowing new hate after new love bearing:

That every word doth almost tell my name,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief;
Why write still all one ever the same,
Most worthy comfort now my greatest grief.

Bearing thy heart which will keep so chary,
Which works on leases, of short numbered hours,
And for thy sake that all this sorrow see,
Nor it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers?

  Or if they sleep thy picture in my mind,
  Mighty charm which makes thy love and am blind.
