0
If thou survive my, well contented day,
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within,
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of may,
The guilty goddess of my self to win:

As interest of the dead which now appear,
And do whateer thou wilt swift footed time;
How many holy and obsequious tear,
But forbid thee one most heinous crime.

The mountain or the sea the day or night,
Doing thee vantage double, vantage me,
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee?

  Or gluttoning on all or all away,
  As with your shadow with these did play.
1
Forgot upon your dearest, love to call,
Should in thought control your times of pleasure,
And beauty on my love yea take them all,
Now while the world unbless some mother:

Was it his spirit by spirits taught to write,
And thou presentst pure unstained prime;
No neither he nor his compeers by night,
But forbid thee one most heinous crime.

Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
That wear this world, out to the ending doom,
Though love what others do abhor,
Shall you pace forth your praise shall still find room?

  Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain,
  By praising him here who doth hence remain.
2
Feeding on that which, doth preserve the ill,
Am of my dull bearer when from thee speed,
Whoever hath her wish thou hast thy will,
Till return of posting is no need:

Thats for thy self the thanks if aught in me,
Deaths second self that seals up all in rest;
For whos so dumb that cannot write to thee,
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed.

Within the gentle closure of my breast,
Comes home again on, better judgement making,
To make some special instant special blest,
That wear this world out to the gaudy spring?

  Receiving nought by elements so slow,
  Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe.
3
As fast as thou, art why should haste me thence,
Nor services to do till you require,
How can my love excuse the slow offence,
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure:

Me from my self disgrace knowing thy will,
Among number one is reckoned none;
Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill,
Since mind at first in character was done.

The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
While he insults oer, dull and speechless tribes,
And sue friend came debtor for my sake,
My love looks fresh and death to me subscribes?

  Be not self willed for thou art much too fair,
  Makes summers welcome thrice more wished more rare.
4
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day,
What potions have drunk of siren tears,
My sinful earth these rebel powers array:

Duty so great which wit so poor as mine,
The spirit of love with perpetual dulness;
Nothing sweet boy but yet like prayers divine,
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fulness.

Therefore love be of thyself so wary,
Thy black is fairest, in my judgments place,
Of more delight than hawks and horses be,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy face?

  Or gluttoning on all or all away,
  Yet him for this my love was my decay.
5
Doth homage to his, new appearing sight,
The guilty goddess of my heart to sway,
So made lame by fortunes dearest spite,
One of her feathered creatures broke away:

Then thou whose will is large and spacious,
Exceeded by the height of happier men;
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
Deserves the travail of worthier pen.

And this my hand against my self respect,
Grows fairer than at, first more strong far greater,
So all my best doth worship thy defect,
That better is by evil still made better?

  Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well,
  Am to wait though waiting so be hell.
6
In the orient when, the gracious light,
For that which gives thee all thy gentle grace,
After my death dear love forget me quite,
Like deceived husband so loves face:

Why write still all one ever the same,
Beauteous thou art covetous and he is kind;
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Pointing to each his thunder rain and wind.

Let him but copy what in you is writ,
The prey of worms, my body being dead,
And such counterpart shall fame his wit,
Which eyes not yet created shall oer read?

  For truth proves thievish for prize so dear,
  That leaves look pale dreading the winters near.
7
Found or thought found, you did painting need,
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme,
Found or thought found you did exceed,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant time:

But thou wilt not nor he will not be so bold,
Beauteous thou art covetous and he is kind;
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
That thou no form of thee hast left behind.

And ruined love when it is built anew,
Delights to peep to, gaze therein on thee,
How can it how can loves eye be true,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be?

  As he takes from you engraft you new,
  But thence learn and find the lesson true.
8
If the dull substance, of my flesh were thought,
Of plagues of dearths or seasons quality,
That thou art beloved of many thing sought,
Full charactered with lasting memory:

If it do not when my heart committed,
The bounteous largess given thee to give;
Nor are mine cars with thy tongues tune delighted,
So great sum of sums yet canst not live.

Love to hear her speak yet well know,
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made,
Mad in pursuit and in possession so,
They live unwooed and unrespected fade?

  And death once dead theres no more dying then,
  And they shall live such virtue hath my pen.
9
As to make me, give the lie to my bed,
And made my self all tyrant for thy sake,
To let base clouds oertake me in my head,
But when she saw my self with thee partake:

Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see;
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek,
That to his subject lends not some small glory.

Feeds on the rarities of natures truth,
And all things turns, to fair that eyes can see,
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth,
Doing thee vantage double vantage me?

  In sleep king but waking no such matter,
  Thus have had thee as dream doth flatter.
10
As to prevent our, maladies unseen,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Full many glorious morning have seen,
That do not drop in for an after loss:

Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
Exceeded by the height of happier men;
Or if it do not from those lips of thine,
Deserves the travail of worthier pen.

Love to hear her speak yet well know,
And wherefore say not, that am old,
But for their virtue only is their show,
Had having and in quest to have years told?

  Receiving nought by elements so slow,
  But heavy tears badges of eithers woe.
11
Why is my judgment, knew no reason why,
To make me travel forth without my cloak,
Grant if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
Some in their wealth some in their rotten smoke:

For all that beauty which you hold in lease,
Among number one is reckoned none;
If all were minded so the times should cease,
Advantage on the kingdom of the sun.

No let me true in love anticipate,
Though in thy face, sweet love should ever dwell,
To be so tickled they would change their state,
To mar the subject that before was well?

  Let no unkind no fair beseechers kill,
  No love toward others in that one will.
12
Doth homage to his, new appearing sight,
Without all bail shall carry me away,
As decrepit father takes delight,
Wherein should your great deserts repay:

As interest of the watery main,
Though in our lives separable spite;
When have seen the hungry ocean gain,
That gainst thy self dost give invention light.

Yet this abundant issue seemed to me,
Which husbandry in honour, might uphold,
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And wherefore say not that am old?

  To give away your self keeps your self still,
  Though you do any thing he thinks no ill.
13
Whats new to speak, what now to register,
When that churl death my days should expiate,
The first my thought the other my desire,
And like enough thou knowst thy estimate:

Making couplement of proud compare,
He robs thee of and pays it thee again;
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Deserves the travail of worthier pen.

So thy great gift upon misprision growing,
Which time and thoughts, so sweetly doth deceive,
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?

  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
  Give them thy fingers me thy lips to kiss.
14
From hence your memory, death cannot take,
To one of one still such and ever so,
Womans face with natures own hand did make,
To new found methods and to temptation slow:

But since your worth wide as the ocean is,
Pity me then and wish were renewed;
How have mine eyes out of their faces,
And almost thence my nature is subdued.

Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
That in thy face, sweet love should ever dwell,
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell?

  And all they foul that thy complexion lack,
  Then will swear beauty herself is black.
15
That she might think, me some untutored youth,
My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
When my love swears that she is made of truth,
And do not do the thing she would have stay:

And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
And gilded honour shamefully misplaced,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.

Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Slandering creation with false, esteem,
Then churls their thoughts although their eyes were kind,
Before joy proposed behind dream?

  But were some child of yours alive that time,
  Which die for goodness who have lived for crime.
16
As decrepit father takes, delight,
With eager compounds we our palate urge,
When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge:

Most true it is an ever fixed mark,
And so my patent back again is swerving;
It is the star to every wandring bark,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.

But for their virtue only is their show,
Doing thee vantage double, vantage me,
Grant never saw goddess go,
Leaving thee living in posterity?

  And see thy blood warm when thou art my all,
  For nothing this wide universe call.
17
Since left you mine, eye and heart league is took,
To new found methods and to compounds strange,
Since left you mine eye is famished for look,
So far from variation or quick change:

And summers green all girded up in sheaves,
Others but stewards of their excellence;
When lofty trees see barren of leaves,
One thing expressing leaves out difference.

Possessing or pursuing no delight,
And sweets grown common, lose their dear delight,
The mountain or the sea the day or night,
When other petty griefs have done their spite?

  Or if they sleep thy picture in my mind,
  Cunning love with tears thou keepst me blind.
18
Lest sorrow lend me, words and words express,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight,
Be wise as thou art cruel do not press,
Tomorrow sharpened in his former might:

Why write still all one ever the same,
When summers breath their masked buds discloses;
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Such heavenly touches neer touched earthly faces.

How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
And only herald to, the edge of doom,
Whether we are mended or whether better they,
Shall you pace forth your praise shall still find room?

  Her love for whose dear love rise and fall,
  For nothing this wide universe call.
19
When thou shalt be, disposed to set me light,
Even those that said could not love you dearer,
When days oppression is not eased by night,
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer:

But thou wilt not nor he will not be so bold,
Must each day say oer the very same;
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
Even as when first hallowed thy fair name.

My name be buried where my body is,
The clear eyes moiety, and the dear hearts part,
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
And constant stars in them read such art?

  How like eves apple doth thy beauty grow,
  To be beloved of thee will not seem so.
20
As to make me, give the lie to my bed,
When not to be receives reproach of being,
To let base clouds oertake me in my head,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving:

And the firm soil win of the watery main,
Dost thou upon thy part can set down story;
When have seen the hungry ocean gain,
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory.

Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
Which time and thoughts, so sweetly doth deceive,
Bring me within the level of your frown,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?

  They draw but what they see know not the heart,
  As thus mine eyes due is thy outward part.
21
Upon thy side against, my self depart,
Tomorrow sharpened in his former might,
For well thou knowst to my dear doting heart,
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite:

Making couplement of proud compare,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays;
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Against the wrackful siege of battring days.

Now with the drops of this inconstant stay,
Strikes each in each, by mutual ordering,
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
Presents thy shadow to my purpose nothing?

  Since what he owes thee thou thy self dost pay,
  Thus do pine and surfeit day by day.
22
To let base clouds, oertake me in my head,
Made old offences of affections new,
And life no longer mourn for me when am dead,
When against my self motley to the view:

If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
And taught it thus anew to greet;
If it be not then love doth well denote,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet.

The sea all water yet receives rain still,
And live no more, to shame nor me nor you,
So thou being rich in will add to thy will,
Makes black night beauteous and her old face new?

  When that shall fade my verse distills your truth,
  And so of you beauteous and lovely youth.
23
If thou survive my, well contented day,
While comments of your praise richly compiled,
And shalt by fortune once more resurvey,
Hath been before how are our brains beguiled:

The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
But best is best if never intermixed;
Give not windy night rainy morrow,
Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed.

Mine own self love quite contrary read,
Before joy proposed behind, dream,
And this my hand against my self indeed,
And am still with them and they mourners seem?

  So is my love still telling what is told,
  And see thy blood warm when thou feelst it cold.
24
They know what beauty, is see where it lies,
And summers lease hath all too precious you,
But tis my heart that loves what they despise,
When against my self motley to the view:

They rightly do inherit heavens graces,
Whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never;
But since your worth wide as the ocean is,
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.

May be straight though they themselves be bevel,
Her pretty looks have, been mine enemies,
No am that am and they that level,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries?

  And see thy blood warm when thou feelst it cold,
  For as the sun is daily new and old.
25
As to prevent our, maladies unseen,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote,
Full many glorious morning have seen,
For they in thee thousand errors note:

Loving offenders thus will excuse ye,
Of his self love to stop posterity;
Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
The boy for trial, needs would touch my breast,
Bring me within the level of your frown,
And frantic mad with evermore unrest?

  So till the judgment that your self arise,
  There lives more life in one of your fair eyes.
26
Thou blind fool love, what dost thou make the shame,
Of the fairest and most precious jewel,
Those hours that with gentle work did frame,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel:

To what it works in like the dyers hand,
Since seldom coming in that long year set;
My soul doth tell my name receives brand,
As after sunset fadeth in the carcanet.

And gainst my self lawful plea commence,
With others thou shouldst, not abhor my state,
For to thy sensual fault bring in sense,
From sullen earth sings hymns at heavens gate?

  Mine be thy love and thy loves use their treasure,
  In sleep king but waking no such matter.
27
That thou art blamed, shall not be thy defect,
And made my self am mortgaged to thy will,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
The worser spirit woman coloured ill:

And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
The fairest votary took up that fire,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me.

To be so tickled they would change their state,
And situation with those, dancing chips,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
Return of love more blest than living lips?

  That beauty still may live in thine or thee,
  Mine ransoms yours and yours must ransom me.
28
After my death dear, love forget me quite,
Till return of posting is no need,
In the orient when the gracious light,
Am of my dull bearer when from thee speed:

Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing;
To follow that which flies before her face,
And for that riches where is my deserving.

This silence for my sin you did impute,
Points on me graciously, with fair aspect,
For impair not beauty being mute,
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect?

  Makes summers welcome thrice more wished more rare,
  To be deaths conquest and make worms thine heir.
29
Or some fierce thing, replete with too much rage,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote,
As an unperfect actor on the stage,
My bonds in thee thousand errors note:

Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
Which steals mens eyes and womens souls amazeth.

Until lifes composition be recured,
And only herald to, the ending doom,
Who even but now come back again assured,
Shall you pace forth your praise shall still find room?

  None unless this miracle have might,
  And gain by ills thrice more than in my sight.
30
If the dull substance, of my sinful earth,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right:

Anon permit the basest clouds to ride,
And time that gave doth now his gift confound;
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Crawls to maturity wherewith being crowned.

Whateer thy thoughts or thy hearts workings be,
Against confounding ages cruel, knife,
But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
My sweet loves beauty though my lovers life?

  If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
  To eat the worlds due by the grave and thee.
31
Thy beauty and thy, years full well befits,
Lest guilty of my self and curse my fate,
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
So long as youth and thou are of one date:

Your self again after your selfs decease,
That thou no form of thee hast left behind;
For all that beauty which you hold in lease,
Beauteous thou art covetous and he is kind.

Then churls their thoughts although their eyes were kind,
And in my madness, might speak ill of thee,
What happy title do find,
Self so self loving were iniquity?

  Those that can see thou lovst and am blind,
  For that same groan doth put this in my mind.
32
Weret aught to me, that languished for her sake,
And my self with thee wherever abide,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed:

But he that writes of you if he can tell,
Against the wrackful siege of battring days;
Or say with princes if it shall go well,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays.

Then in the eyes of all posterity,
Thy proud hearts slave, and vassal wretch to be,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Which for their habitation chose out thee?

  Thine by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  And thou all they hast all the all of me.
33
As fast as thou, art too dear for my muse,
While comments of your praise richly compiled,
The dedicated words which writers use,
And precious phrase by all the muses filed:

Are vanishing or vanished out of sight,
Whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never;
And in some perfumes is there more delight,
In the distraction of this madding fever.

The mountain or the sea the day or night,
Than those old nine, which rhymers invocate,
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state?

  So long lives this and this gives life to thee,
  Suns of the world or else this glutton be.
34
Since left you mine, eye and heart league is took,
Some in their hawks and hounds some in their horse,
Since left you mine eye is famished for look,
Some in their hawks and hounds some in their bodys force:

Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
And wear their brave state out of memory;
For through the painter must you see his skill,
That you are you so dignifies his story.

Love to hear her speak yet well know,
Made more or less, by thy true telling friend,
Die to themselves sweet roses do not so,
What strained touches rhetoric can lend?

  Or if they sing tis with so dull cheer,
  For truth proves thievish for prize so dear.
35
And life no longer, than thy love will stay,
In what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose,
If thou survive my well contented day,
And place my merit in the fragrant rose:

That use is not forbidden usury,
Which to repair should be thy chief desire;
Thats for thy self to breed another thee,
Whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never.

Thus policy in love but truly write,
And let that pine, to aggravate thy store,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
To trust those tables that receive thee more?

  Yet do not so love thee in such sort,
  As thus mine eyes due is thy good report.
36
Then let not winters, ragged hand deface,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed,
Make sweet some vial treasure thou some place,
These present absent with swift motion slide:

That every word doth almost tell my name,
Past reason hunted and no sooner had;
Why write still all one ever the same,
And threescore year would make the taker mad.

What happy title do find,
That is so proud, thy service to despise,
Then churls their thoughts although their eyes were kind,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?

  Then will swear beauty herself is black,
  And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
37
Who is it for, fear to wet widows eye,
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within,
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why,
The guilty goddess of my self to win:

That every word doth almost tell my name,
Speaking of worth what worth in you doth grow;
Why write still all one ever the same,
How would thy shadows form form happy show.

Then soul live thou upon thy servants loss,
Guess one angel in, anothers hell,
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross,
Though in thy face sweet love should ever dwell?

  Or if they sleep thy picture in my mind,
  My grief lies onward and my joy behind.
38
They know what beauty, is see where it lies,
Now while the world unbless some mother,
When in disgrace with fortune and mens eyes,
Nor services to do till you require:

But thou wilt not nor he will not be free,
And almost thence my nature is subdued;
Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
If thinking on me then and wish were renewed.

The sea all water yet receives rain still,
Guess one angel in, anothers hell,
So thou being rich in will add to thy will,
Though in thy face sweet love should ever dwell?

  For truth proves thievish for prize so dear,
  That leaves look pale dreading the winters near.
39
How with this rage, shall beauty hold plea,
And made my self with his fair doth rehearse,
Thine eyes love and they as pitying me,
While thou dost breathe that pourst into my verse:

For whos so dumb that cannot write to thee,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing;
Thats for thy self the thanks if aught in me,
To bitter sauces did frame my feeding.

Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Let it then as, well beseem thy heart,
Or being wrecked am worthless boat,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part?

  But thence learn and find the lesson true,
  Hate from hate away she threw.
40
Full many glorious morning, have seen,
And you but one can every shadow lend,
As to make our appetite more keen,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend:

Why should others false adulterate eyes,
Oercharged with burthen of mine own loves might;
Then being asked where all thy beauty lies,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from loves delight.

Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
To be so tickled they would change their state,
While he insults oer dull and speechless tribes?

  All men are bad and in my purpose bred,
  Pity the world besides methinks are dead.
41
No longer mourn for, me when am dead,
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure,
As to make me give the lie to my bed,
Now while the world unbless some mother:

That record could with backward look,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend;
Show me your image in some antique book,
That in the least of them my life hath end.

Mine own self love quite contrary read,
Thy proud hearts slave, and vassal wretch to be,
Loves best habit is in my self indeed,
And all things turns to fair that eyes can see?

  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
  Give them thy fingers me thy lips to kiss.
42
Your love and pity, doth th impression fill,
No longer yours than you your self here live,
My tongue tied muse in manners holds her still,
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give:

Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
And you in grecian tires are painted new.

Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized,
Or who his spoil, of beauty can forbid,
And do so love yet when they have devised,
Shall times best jewel from times chest lie hid?

  To be deaths conquest and make worms thine heir,
  Or call it winter which being full of care.
43
Why with the spite, of fortune make me bow,
They are but dressings of former child,
That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And precious phrase by all the muses filed:

Ah do not when my heart another youth,
When was wont to greet it with my lays;
Most true it is that have looked on truth,
In process of the time bettering days.

But when my glass shows me my self respect,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride,
So all my best doth worship thy defect,
And that in guess they measure by thy side?

  Cunning love with tears thou keepst me blind,
  Or if they sleep thy picture in my mind.
44
Call not me to, my thoughts as food to life,
The guilty goddess of my heart to sway,
And for the peace of you hold such strife,
From limits far remote where thou dost stay:

How many holy and obsequious tear,
Deaths second self that seals up all in rest;
As interest of the dead which now appear,
Although she knows my days are past the best.

Of more delight than hawks and horses be,
To guard the lawful, reasons on thy face,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Might not then use rigour in my judgments place?

  And so of you beauteous and lovely youth,
  When that shall fade my verse distills your truth.
45
Wound me not to, the marriage of true minds,
So do our minutes hasten to their end,
Which alters when it alteration finds,
And you but one can every shadow lend:

Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
How would thy shadows form form happy show;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
Though not to love yet love to tell me so.

For to thy sensual fault bring in sense,
And all things turns, to fair that eyes can see,
And gainst my self lawful plea commence,
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be?

  But weep to have that which it fears to lose,
  This thought is as death which cannot choose.
46
Thy bosom is endeared, with all hearts,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote,
And there reigns love and all loves loving parts,
For they in thee thousand errors note:

Reserve them for my love not for their rhyme,
Past reason hunted and no sooner had;
And yet this time removed was summers time,
And threescore year would make the taker mad.

For she hath no exchequer now but his,
To leave for nothing, all thy glory live,
Why should he live now nature bankrupt is,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give?

  And yet by heaven think my love you know,
  Receiving nought by elements so slow.
47
When to the world, should task you to recite,
So far from variation or quick change,
After my death dear love forget me quite,
To new found methods and to compounds strange:

Crooked eclipses gainst his glory fight,
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
What needst thou wound with cunning when thy might,
Roses of shadow since his rose is true.

Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
That time will come, and take my love away,
But that so much as my poor name rehearse,
By looking on thee in the living day?

  And to this witness call the fools of time,
  Which die for goodness who have lived for crime.
48
These vacant leaves thy, minds imprint will bear,
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled,
In the old age black was not counted fair,
With beautys treasure ere it be self killed:

Before the golden tresses of the prime,
When summers breath their masked buds discloses;
And yet this time removed was summers time,
As the perfumed tincture of the roses.

And by this will be gainer too,
And both for my, sake lay on me this cross,
Hearing you praised say tis so tis true,
And losing her my friend hath found that loss?

  And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
  All men are bad and in their badness reign.
49
May still seem love, to me though altered new,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds,
Those parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view,
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds:

Make answer muse wilt thou not haply say,
Against the wrackful siege of battring days;
My soul doth tell my body that he may,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays.

But beautys waste hath in the world doth spend,
Making dead wood more, blest than living lips,
Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
And situation with those dancing chips?

  The worth of that is that which he doth say,
  Yet seemed it winter still and you away.
