0
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me,
But now my gracious numbers are decayed,
Of plagues of dearths or seasons quality:
Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
But no such roses see in her cheeks;
For never resting time leads summer on,
That in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
For to thy sensual fault bring in sense,
Such civil war is, in my love away,
Yet in these thoughts my self lawful plea commence,
Of others voices that my life decay?
  These offices so oft as thou wilt look,
  Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
1
Thou art cruel do, not love thee not,
That barren tender of poets debt,
In faith do not think on thee when forgot,
And therefore to your fair no painting set:
For thou betraying me do betray,
Past reason hunted and no sooner had;
Which by and by black night doth take away,
And threescore year would make the taker mad.
For to no other pass my verses tend,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived,
Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend,
Hath motion and mine eye may be deceived?
  As with your shadow with these did play,
  Or gluttoning on all or all away.
2
They know what beauty, is see where it lies,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay,
But tis my heart that loves what they despise,
The guilty goddess of my heart to sway:
When lofty trees see barren of leaves,
The bounteous largess given thee to give;
And summers green all girded up in sheaves,
So great sum of sums yet canst not live.
And gainst my self almost despising,
By looking on thee, in the living day,
Love alters not with his gust is greeing,
When perhaps compounded am with clay?
  But do not so love thee in such sort,
  As thus mine eyes due is thy good report.
3
They know what beauty, is see where it lies,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me,
But tis my heart that loves what they despise,
So you oer green my bad my good allow:
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,
And given to time your own dear purchased right;
Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days,
And all things turns, to fair that eyes can see,
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be?
  Thine by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  So long lives this and this shall ever be.
4
How with this rage, shall beauty hold plea,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
Music to hear why hearst thou music sadly,
As to behold desert beggar born:
For how do hold thee but by thy granting,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
Man in hue all hues in his controlling,
And wear their brave state out of memory.
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized,
And live no more, to shame nor me nor you,
And do so love yet when they have devised,
Which parts the shore where two contracted new?
  Which three till now never kept seat in one,
  My love to thee thou single wilt prove none.
5
Those lines that before, have writ do lie,
And yet it may be said loved her dearly,
Grant if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
Yet what the best is take the worst to be:
Nor that full star that ushers in the spring,
And broils root out the work of masonry;
Man in hue all hues in his controlling,
The very part was consecrate to thee.
That in thy creation did decree,
They live unwooed and, unrespected fade,
And simple truth miscalled simplicity,
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made?
  But if thou turn back and my joy behind,
  Or if they sleep thy picture in my mind.
6
To me fair friend, you never can be old,
Hath been before how are our brains beguiled,
That time of year thou mayst in me behold,
They are but dressings of former child:
That record could with backward look,
To set form upon desired change;
Show me your image in some antique book,
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown,
The mountain or the sea the day or night,
At my abuses reckon up their own?
  But since she pricked thee out for womens pleasure,
  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer.
7
Thus is his cheek, the map of days outworn,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed,
In act thy bed vow broke and new faith torn,
And my self with thee wherever abide:
Do envy those jacks that nimble leap,
Past reason hunted and no sooner had;
The world will be thy widow and still weep,
And threescore year would make the taker mad.
Alas why fearing of times tyranny,
Whilst thy babe chase, thee afar behind,
But in the eyes of all posterity,
Commit to these waste blanks and thou shalt find?
  And night doth nightly make griefs length seem stronger,
  But since she pricked thee out for womens pleasure.
8
Since left you mine, eye and heart league is took,
And sable curls all silvered oer with white,
Since left you mine eye is famished for look,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might:
Why should others false adulterate eyes,
Beauty oer snowed and bareness every where;
The age to come would say this poet lies,
To hideous winter and confounds him there.
Or being wrecked am worthless boat,
Thy adverse party is, thy advocate,
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Eternal numbers to outlive long date?
  Since from thee going he went wilful slow,
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
9
Lord of my lameness, and straight will halt,
That thou consumst thy self in single life,
Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
The world will wail thee like makeless wife:
Or if it do not from those lips of thine,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see;
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
Times thievish progress to eternity.
Grant never saw goddess go,
The one doth shadow, of your beauty show,
But for their virtue only is their show,
And die as fast as they see others grow?
  And yet thou wilt for being pent in thee,
  Were to import forgetfulness in me.
