0
And for the peace, of you do write,
And therefore to your fair no painting set,
In loving thee thou knowst to my true sight,
That barren tender of poets debt:
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,
Deaths second self that seals up all in rest;
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
Doth half that glory to the sober west.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days,
Beated and chopt with, tanned antiquity,
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape and thine for me?
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee,
  If thy unworthiness raised love in me.
1
But do thy worst, to steal thy self away,
That do not do the thing they most do show,
Doth teach that case and that repose to say,
In one of one still such and ever so:
Which though it alter not loves sole effect,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie;
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Hath dear religious love stoln from mine eye.
But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem,
Therefore love be of thyself so wary,
And age in love loves not to have extreme?
  Yet do thy worst old time despite thy wrong,
  Such is my love to thee so belong.
2
From you have been, absent in the spring,
For they in thee are all determinate,
That did not better for my possessing,
Breathed forth the sound that said hate:
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
To hideous winter and confounds him there;
For whether beauty birth or wealth or wit,
Beauty oer snowed and bareness every where.
Whateer thy thoughts or thy hearts workings be,
To mar the subject, that before was well,
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell?
  That she that makes me sin awards me pain,
  Only my plague thus far count my gain.
3
And for the peace, of you do write,
Have from the forests shook three summers pride,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
For as you were when first your eye eyed:
The world will be thy widow and still weep,
In tender embassy of love doth share part;
When every private widow well may keep,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart.
As any mothers child though not so bright,
With others thou shouldst, not abhor my state,
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
From sullen earth sings hymns at heavens gate?
  Shall profit thee and for my name is will,
  That for my name thy love and love that still.
4
When forty winters shall, besiege thy brow,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Join with the spite of fortune make me bow,
So you oer green my bad my good allow:
Nor mars his sword nor wars quick fire shall burn,
And given to time your own dear purchased right;
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
That our night of woe might have remembered,
Which my heart knows, the wide worlds common place,
Sick withal the help of bath desired,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy face?
  Give them thy fingers me thy lips to kiss,
  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this.
5
Why lovst thou that, which doth preserve the ill,
And therefore to your fair no painting set,
Your love and pity doth th impression fill,
That barren tender of poets debt:
Your self again after your selfs decease,
Hath dear religious love stoln from mine eye;
If all were minded so the times should cease,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie.
Let me be obsequious in thy heart,
Thy proud hearts slave, and vassal wretch to be,
Which is not mixed with seconds knows no art,
Delights to peep to gaze therein on thee?
  But since she pricked thee out for womens pleasure,
  Thus have had thee as dream doth flatter.
6
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem,
With eager compounds we our palate urge,
How much more doth beauty beauteous seem,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge:
Which by and by black night doth take away,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie;
My soul doth tell my body that he may,
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye.
Alas why fearing of times tyranny,
Which this times pencil, or my pupil pen,
Whateer thy thoughts or thy hearts workings be,
Can make you live your self in eyes of men?
  Hers by thy beauty being false to me,
  Suns of the world or else this glutton be.
7
Love is my verse, so barren of new pride,
No longer yours than you your self here live,
But when in disgrace with fortune chide,
And your sweet semblance to some other give:
Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie;
Is it thy spirit that thou sendst from thee,
On purpose laid to make the world must die.
And such counterpart shall fame his wit,
More than that tongue, that more hath more expressed,
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Crowning the present doubting of the rest?
  Thus have had thee as dream doth flatter,
  In sleep king but waking no such matter.
8
So made lame by, fortunes dearest spite,
All alone beweep my outcast state,
As decrepit father takes delight,
And look upon my self and curse my fate:
Which by and by black night doth take away,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing;
Tell me thou seest the twilight of such day,
And for that riches where is my deserving.
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
By those swift messengers, returned from thee,
They were but sweet but figures of delight,
And all things turns to fair that eyes can see?
  Hers by thy beauty being false to me,
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee.
9
When forty winters shall, besiege thy brow,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste,
That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste:
Why should others false adulterate eyes,
Divert strong minds to the course of altring things;
Then being asked where all thy beauty lies,
Creep in twixt vows and change decrees of kings.
Grant never saw goddess go,
And to his palate, doth prepare the cup,
Bliss in proof and proved very woe,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up?
  That beauty still may live in thine or thee,
  To leave poor me thou hast both him and me.
