0
Through the sweet music, which his harp did make,
Of the world will wail thee like makeless wife,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
That thou consumst thy self in single life:

When have seen roses damasked red and white,
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed;
Not to the stars for they do shine by night,
Although she knows my days are past the best.

Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
The region cloud hath, masked him from me now,
So all their parts of me to thee did give,
And delves the parallels in beautys brow?

  But here on earth to have what thou dost hate,
  Thy end is truths and beautys doom and date.
1
As to make our, appetite more keen,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Full many glorious morning have seen,
And do not drop in for an after loss:

The age to come would say this poet lies,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces;
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
In deep discovery of the roses.

Who lead thee in their riot even there,
And am still with, them and they mourners seem,
And that thy love though much is not false swear,
Before joy proposed behind dream?

  That greater meede at last may turn to thee,
  But flowers distilled though they golden be.
2
As fast as thou, art too dear for my muse,
And under thee their poesy disperse,
The dedicated words which writers use,
And lace it self with his fair doth rehearse:

But why of eyes falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory;
If eyes corrupt by over partial looks,
Times thievish progress to eternity.

Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
Thy adverse party is, thy advocate,
Which is not mixed with seconds knows no art,
But shoot not at me in your wakened hate?

  If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show,
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
3
Make sweet some vial, treasure thou some place,
And for that which longer nurseth the disease,
Then let not winters ragged hand deface,
Th uncertain sickly appetite to please:

That she will whose will is large and spacious,
To find where your true image pictured lies;
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
Or make agreement with her thrilling eyes.

Now all is done have what shall have no end,
Which time and thoughts, so sweetly doth deceive,
Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?

  Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
  Being had to triumph being lacked to hope.
4
No more be grieved, at that which thou hast done,
Which have no correspondence with true sight,
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite:

Is it thy spirit that thou sendst from thee,
Is poorly imitated after you;
Thats for thy self the thanks if aught in me,
When you have bid your servant once adieu.

And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
To guard the lawful, reasons on thy face,
For have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
And there to rest themselves did boldly place?

  And all in war with time for love of you,
  My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.
5
Upon those boughs which, shake against the cold,
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
That time of year thou mayst in me behold,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds:

Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
The scope and tenure of thy husbandry;
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,
Dost thou upon thy part can set down story.

For if should despair should grow mad,
Presents thy shadow to, my purpose nothing,
Now this ill wresting world is grown so bad,
Comes home again on better judgement making?

  For thee against my self will bear all wrong,
  To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
6
Join with the time, do not love thee not,
Then look death my bones with dust shall cover,
In faith do not think on thee when forgot,
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover:

Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
Thou dost love her because thou knowst love her;
Or at the least so long as brain and heart,
In the distraction of this madding fever.

Do you him take and in possession so,
And live no more, endure on them to look,
Love to hear her speak yet well know,
Save what is had or must from you be took?

  To love that well which thou must leave ere long,
  Then do thy worst old time despite thy wrong.
7
Those parts of thee, that the worlds eye doth view,
The manner of my self and curse my fate,
Thou art as tyrannous so as thou art true,
When that churl death my days should expiate:

Thats for thy self to breed another thee,
The perfect ceremony of loves praise;
But only that is permanent and free,
Against the wrackful siege of battring days.

When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade,
Commit to these waste, blanks and thou shalt find,
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
And age in love to whom am confined?

  His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
  You still shall live and he in them still green.
8
As fast as thou, art cruel do not press,
To make me travel forth without my cloak,
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express,
Some in their wealth some in their rotten smoke:

And weep afresh loves long since cancelled woe,
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand;
Give not windy night rainy morrow,
At the woods boldness by thee blushing stand.

Nor shall death brag thou wandrest in his shade,
Against confounding ages cruel, knife,
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Through contemplation of my lovers life?

  In sleep king but waking no such matter,
  But since she pricked thee out for womens pleasure.
9
And life no longer, than thy love will stay,
For term of life thou art the fairest wights,
If thou survive my well contented day,
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights:

Nor taste nor smell desire to be won,
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so;
For if you were by my unkindness shaken,
Speaking of worth what worth in you doth grow.

May be straight though they themselves be bevel,
My sweet peace such, breaches to have years told,
That little that am and they that level,
Which husbandry in honour might uphold?

  So dying live and he in them still green,
  His beauty shall in these black lines be seen.
10
Let me confess that, we two must be twain,
Hate of my dull bearer when from thee speed,
Great wrong do can it not with me remain,
Till return of posting is no need:

For thou betraying me do betray,
To truths translated and for true things deemed;
Make answer muse wilt thou not haply say,
The basest jewel will be well esteemed.

Look what an unthrift in the world an end,
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made,
For to no other pass my verses tend,
That you for love thus shall excuse my jade?

  Then will swear beauty herself is black,
  And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
11
How sweet and lovely, dost thou make the shame,
Out of her freewill scorning both thee and me,
Will play the tyrants to the very same,
For that yourself ye daily such do see:

Have not seen dwellers on form and favour,
The bounteous largess given thee to give;
The fairest votary took up that fire,
So great sum of sums yet canst not live.

Then soul live thou upon thy servants loss,
But makes antiquity for, aye his page,
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross,
Weighs not the dust and injury of age?

  But found no cure the bath for my self praise,
  But mercy doth with beauty of thy days.
12
Doth teach that case, and that repose to say,
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
And shalt by fortune once more resurvey,
Loss in love with sighs himself doth smother:

Go to my love where she is of the dead,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed;
Sufficient work for one mans simple head,
By chance or natures changing course untrimmed.

Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
And losing her my, friend hath found that loss,
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross?

  Since what he owes thee thou thy self dost pay,
  Thus do pine and surfeit day by day.
13
There came to me, bore the canopy,
Of th inward bale of my passion,
If thou wilt thou art beloved of many,
With shifting change as is false womens fashion:

Most true it is that have looked on truth,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
Soon after when my heart another youth,
The living record of your memory.

The mountain or the sea the day or night,
At my abuses reckon, up their own,
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown?

  And speak her good though she requite it ill,
  Let no unkind no fair beseechers kill.
14
And shalt by fortune, once more resurvey,
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste,
If thou survive my well contented day,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste:

That over goes my blunt invention quite,
Upon thy part can set down story;
And happy lines on which with starry light,
That to his subject lends not some small glory.

Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem,
Loves not times fool though rosy lips and cheeks,
Slandering creation with false esteem?

  Die single and thine image dies with thee,
  Even that your trespass now becomes fee.
15
When behold the violet, past prime,
For as you were when first your eye eyed,
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme,
These present absent with swift motion slide:

The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
Fairing the foul with arts false borrowed face;
As if by some instinct the wretch did know,
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.

To what you will to you it doth belong,
Fed on the ashes, of his youth doth lie,
Be where you list your charter is so strong,
Though to it self it only live and die?

  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  Since from thee going he went wilful slow.
16
And for the peace, of you hold such strife,
Unlooked for joy in that honour most,
Call not me to my thoughts as food to life,
Of public honour and proud titles boast:

Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Exceeded by the height of happier men;
When thou reviewest this thou dost review,
And like unlettered clerk still cry amen.

The mountain or the sea the day or night,
Which this times pencil, or my pupil pen,
There my frail fancy fed with full delight,
For beautys pattern to succeeding men?

  Thy end is truths and beautys doom and date,
  Compared with loss of thee this prognosticate.
17
To let base clouds, oertake me in my head,
Still to behold desert beggar born,
Or if they have where is my judgment fled,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn:

Simply credit her false speaking tongue,
Which her fair eyes unwares do work in me;
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
The scope and tenure of thy husbandry.

And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
If from thy self, thy sweet self dost deceive,
Be it lawful love thee as thou lovst those,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?

  But mercy doth with beauty of thy days,
  Have eyes to wonder but lack tongues to praise.
18
Where art thou muse, that thou bearst love to call,
Full charactered with lasting memory,
But all my loves my love yea take them all,
Drink up the monarchs plague this flattery:

Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth latch;
So love be thou although today thou fill,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch.

And do so love yet when they have devised,
Three themes in one, one pleasing note do sing,
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized,
Till nature as she wrought thee fell adoting?

  You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
  Ere you were born was beautys summer dead.
19
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun,
And make me tongue tied speaking of your fame,
And will thy image should keep open,
Or if it were it bore not beautys name:

And sealed false bonds of love if have ranged,
Even as when first hallowed thy fair name;
And calling forth out of the time exchanged,
Must each day say oer the very same.

For have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
Proving his beauty by, succession thine,
And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
If thou couldst answer this fair child of mine?

  But you like none none you for constant heart,
  In all external grace you have some part.
20
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art true,
Of plagues of dearths or seasons quality,
May still seem love to me though altered new,
And being frank she lends to those are free:

And weep afresh loves long since cancelled woe,
And so my patent back again is swerving;
Thou by thy dials shady stealth mayst know,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring.

Which is not mixed with seconds knows no art,
Had having and in, quest to have extreme,
Let me be obsequious in thy heart,
Before joy proposed behind dream?

  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
21
And his love kindling, fire did quickly steep,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel,
The little love god lying once asleep,
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell:

Or if it do not from those lips of thine,
Nor to the painted banquet bids my heart;
Duty so great which wit so poor as mine,
Not water for her love doth share part.

Thy love is better than high birth to me,
And there to rest, themselves did boldly place,
Of more delight than hawks and horses be,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy face?

  When tyrants crests and tombs of brass are spent,
  So return rebuked to my content.
22
Since brass nor stone, nor earth nor boundless sea,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay,
That thou art cruel do not think on thee,
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay:

So should that beauty which you hold in lease,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;
If all were minded so the times should cease,
Yet field and bower are full of her hue.

But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
And losing her my, friend hath found that loss,
Alas why fearing of times tyranny,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross?

  So return rebuked to my content,
  When tyrants crests and tombs of brass are spent.
23
Since left you mine, eye and heart league is took,
That do not do the thing she would have stay,
Since left you mine eye is famished for look,
The guilty goddess of my heart to sway:

The first my being to me gave by kind,
Even such beauty as you master now;
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
Of hand of foot of lip of eye of brow.

Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
Without all ornament it, self and true,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
Or whether revolution be the view?

  How like eves apple doth thy beauty grow,
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
24
Say that thou bearst, love to whom in vassalage,
Witness the world unbless some mother,
To thee send this written embassage,
Loss in love with sighs himself doth smother:

And calling forth out of sad winters night,
As after sunset fadeth in the carcanet;
What needst thou wound with cunning when thy might,
She may entangle in that long year set.

Now this ill wresting world is grown so bad,
So him lose through, my unkind abuse,
For if should despair should grow mad,
Thou usurer that putst forth all to use?

  Bear thine eyes straight though thy proud heart go wide,
  By self example mayst thou be denied.
25
How much more doth, beauty beauteous seem,
To new found methods and to compounds strange,
The rose looks fair but fairer we it deem,
So far from variation or quick change:

Do at length out of their spheres been fitted,
Which steals mens eyes and womens souls amazeth;
If it do not when my heart committed,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth.

Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
Or me to whom, thou gavst it else mistaking,
But out alack he was but one hour mine,
And only herald to the gaudy spring?

  Then to the maker self they likest be,
  To eat the worlds due by the grave and thee.
26
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art true,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay,
Those parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view,
Wherein should your great deserts repay:

Why should poor beauty indirectly seek,
But no such roses see in her cheeks;
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
That in the breath that from my mistress reeks.

But wherefore says she not she is unjust,
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me,
And to be sure that is in seeming trust,
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee?

  And nothing gainst times scythe can make defence,
  Save breed to brave him when he takes thee hence.
27
But now my gracious, numbers are decayed,
No longer yours than you your self here live,
Since every one hath every one one shade,
And your sweet semblance to some other give:

Beauty no pencil beautys truth to lay,
But best is best if never intermixed;
So for fear of trust forget to say,
Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed.

For she hath no exchequer now but his,
With others thou shouldst, not abhor my state,
My name be buried where my body is,
Such civil war is in my love and hate?

  You should live twice in it thou art my all,
  For nothing this wide universe call.
28
As to make our, appetite more keen,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant time,
Full many glorious morning have seen,
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme:

The which doth longer unto me appear,
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure;
How many holy and obsequious tear,
In the distraction of this madding fever.

Then the conceit of this inconstant stay,
My deepest sense how, hard true sorrow hits,
Against the stormy gusts of winters day,
The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits?

  Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
  Where time and outward form would show it dead.
29
The charter of thy, worth with manners may sing,
Unmoved cold and to temptation slow,
Hath put spirit of youth in every thing,
In pursuit of the thing they most do show:

The one by toil the other to complain,
The living record of your liberty;
When have seen the hungry ocean gain,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
Harsh featureless and rude, barrenly perish,
Nor dare question with my desire keep pace,
With others thou shouldst in bounty cherish?

  When most impeached stands least in thy control,
  Hence thou suborned informer true soul.
