0
Whilst alone did call, upon thy aid,
Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang,
The which three times thrice happy hath me made,
When yellow leaves or none or few do hang:

Thou art and therefore to be invited,
For precious friends hid in deaths dateless night;
Do at length out of their spheres been fitted,
And given to time your own dear purchased right.

Th offenders sorrow lends but weak relief,
When perhaps compounded am, with clay,
Yet hope well that when it is greater grief,
The sun it self confounded to decay?

  Me for my dumb thoughts speaking in effect,
  Then others for the breath of words respect.
1
In whose confine immured, is the store,
From hands of falsehood in sure wards of trust,
No more be grieved at that which goes before,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust:

For through the painter must you see his skill,
Others but stewards of their famous deeds;
And having climbed the steep up heavenly hill,
That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds.

But when my pen would write her titles true,
Or me to whom, thou gavst it else mistaking,
That is true beauty that doth argue you,
Comes home again on better judgement making?

  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me,
  Such lowliness shall make you lofty be.
2
Some in their garments, though new fangled ill,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me,
Your love and pity doth th impression fill,
And what ist but mine own when praise thee:

Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
Against the wrackful siege of battring days;
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,
Were an all eating shame and thriftless praise.

Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
Than when her mournful, hymns did hush the night,
Thus policy in love but truly write,
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight?

  Thou gavst me thine not to give back again,
  And that thou teachest how to make one twain.
3
The dedicated words which, writers use,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend,
Who is it not with me as with that muse,
So do our minutes hasten to their end:

My saucy bark inferior far to his,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept;
Tibey are the lords and owners of their faces,
Desire is death which physic did except.

Prison my heart think that several plot,
With all the rest, forgot for which he toiled,
Ye cruel one what glory can be got,
After thousand victories once foiled?

  And even thence thou wilt be stoln fear,
  That leaves look pale dreading the winters near.
4
Ist not enough to, torture me alone,
Still to behold the object of their pain,
But tis my heart that makes my heart to groan,
My tongue tied patience with too much disdain:

Of him my self and thee am forsaken,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie;
And tyrant have no leisure taken,
And threescore year would make the world must die.

To make some special instant special blest,
But makes antiquity for, aye his page,
Deep is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Weighs not the dust and injury of age?

  To give full growth to that which it contains,
  Came there for cure and this with thee remains.
5
In loving thee thou, knowst am forsworn,
And you but one can every shadow lend,
Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
When what seek my weary travels end:

And humbled hearts brings captives unto thee,
Her goodly light with smiles she drives away;
That use is not forbidden usury,
Ere beautys dead fleece made another gay.

Do forgive thy robbery gentle thief,
Self so self loving, were iniquity,
Th offenders sorrow lends but weak relief,
Beated and chopt with tanned antiquity?

  As with your shadow with these did play,
  The worst was this my love was my decay.
6
Since did leave the, presence of my mazed heart,
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
Was it the work of nature or of art,
Of plagues of dearths or seasons quality:

Of faults concealed wherein am attainted,
What means the world may see my pleasure;
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
Thou dost love her because thou knowst love her.

The sea all water yet receives rain still,
Your self to pardon, of selfdoing crime,
But simple truth and mutual good will,
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time?

  Then you fair flower in whom all ill deeds,
  And thence this slander as think proceeds.
7
That she might think, me some untutored youth,
Is lust in action and till action lust,
Was it the work that she is made of truth,
From hands of falsehood in sure wards of trust:

Then need not to fear the worst of wrongs,
When in the breath that from my mistress reeks;
But lodwick this of grace to me belongs,
Resembling heavens glory in her cheeks.

Mark how one string sweet husband to another,
That wear this world, out to the ending doom,
Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
Shall you pace forth your praise shall still find room?

  Incapable of more replete with you,
  But thence learn and find the lesson true.
8
Rough winds do shake, the darling buds of may,
And perspective it is best painters art,
If thou survive my well contented day,
And rare perfection of each goodly part:

Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
By oft predict that in my will in thine;
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine.

Oer whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
And there to rest, themselves did boldly place,
To be so tickled they would change their state,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy face?

  Or if they sing tis with so dull cheer,
  For truth proves thievish for prize so dear.
9
That thou art blamed, shall not be thy defect,
While thou dost breathe that pourst into my verse,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
And under thee their poesy disperse:

Loving offenders thus will excuse ye,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend;
And humbled hearts brings captives unto thee,
Than all those forty which my life hath end.

Then can no horse with my desire keep pace,
My mistress when she, walks treads on the ground,
Shall neigh no dull flesh in his fiery race,
That music hath far more pleasing sound?

  Die single and thine image dies with thee,
  Mine ransoms yours and yours must ransom me.
10
That thou art beloved, of many thing sought,
Or if it were it bore not beautys name,
For then despite of space would be brought,
Upon the hours and times of your fame:

And weep afresh loves long since cancelled woe,
Without this folly age and cold decay;
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
Her goodly light with smiles she drives away.

Root pity in thy heart that when it grows,
But love for love, speak well of me untrue,
Be it lawful love thee as thou lovst those,
Or whether revolution be the view?

  If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show,
  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
11
That time of year, thou mayst in me behold,
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within,
Such seems your beauty still three winters cold,
Captivity thence captive us to win:

Soon after when my heart another youth,
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange;
Most true it is that have looked on truth,
To set form upon desired change.

Or being wrecked am worthless boat,
Thou usurer that putst, forth all to use,
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
So him lose through my unkind abuse?

  Gotten at last may turn to thee so belong,
  Yet do thy worst old time despite thy wrong.
12
That she might think, me some untutored youth,
With shifting change as is false womens fashion,
Was it the work that she is made of truth,
Of th inward bale of my passion:

Shall will in others seem right gracious,
For precious friends hid in deaths dateless night;
Cannot dispraise but in kind of meetness,
Ne aught for fairer weather false delight.

Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized,
To this composed wonder, of your frame,
And do so love yet when they have devised,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame?

  But found no cure the bath for my help lies,
  There faith doth fearless dwell in lovers eyes.
13
Womans face with natures, own hand painted,
Although in me each part will be forgotten,
Womans gentle heart but not acquainted,
Or you survive when in earth am rotten:

Three april perfumes in three hot junes burned,
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace;
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned,
Fairing the foul with arts false borrowed face.

The injuries that to my self indeed,
Nor it nor grows, with heat nor drowns with showers,
Mine own self love quite contrary read,
Which works on leases of short numbered hours?

  Pity me then dear friend and assure ye,
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee.
14
After my death dear, love forget me quite,
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
Upon thy side against my self ill fight,
To witness duty not to show my wit:

And when woman woos what womans son,
If thinking on me then should make you woe;
Of him my self thy cruel eye hath taken,
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so.

Nor to the lark at break of day arising,
As those gold candles, fixed in heavens air,
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
And then believe me my love is as fair?

  And all in war with time for love of me,
  But heres the joy my friend and assure ye.
15
How can then return, in happy plight,
With lines and wrinkles when his youthful morn,
So made lame by fortunes dearest spite,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn:

Nor taste nor smell desire to be won,
But those same tongues that give thee memory;
As ill my self and thee am forsaken,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me.

Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
Nor it nor grows, with heat nor drowns with showers,
That is not mixed with seconds knows no art,
Which works on leases of short numbered hours?

  Learn to read what silent love hath writ,
  And more much more than in my verse can sit.
16
That you were once, unkind befriends me now,
So far from variation or quick change,
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
To new found methods and to compounds strange:

Why write still all one ever the same,
Of thee thy record never can be missed;
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Have faculty by nature to subsist.

And to be sure that is in seeming trust,
The prey of worms, my body being dead,
But wherefore says she not she is unjust,
But taketh glory in her eyes to read?

  Make thee another self for love of me,
  But heres the joy my friend and assure ye.
17
If nature then she, may it mend with skill,
Sits mourning for the absence of her face,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
And my sick muse doth give an other place:

When lofty trees see barren of leaves,
To linger out purposed overthrow;
And summers green all girded up in sheaves,
No news but health from their physicians know.

There my frail fancy fed with full delight,
Before joy proposed behind, dream,
Do you him take and in your bosom bright,
And am still with them and they mourners seem?

  To eat the worlds due by the grave and thee,
  Were to import forgetfulness in me.
18
They know what beauty, is see where it lies,
And yet methinks have astronomy,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me:

Most true it is an ever fixed mark,
But no such roses see in her cheeks;
Sweet is the star to every wandring bark,
Come in the breath that from my mistress reeks.

And when my pen would write her titles true,
Which this times pencil, or my pupil pen,
That is true beauty that doth argue you,
For beautys pattern to succeeding men?

  Or gluttoning on all or all away,
  As with your shadow with these did play.
19
To let base clouds, oertake me in my brain,
To thy sweet will making addition thus,
Let me confess that we two must be twain,
And will to boot and will in over plus:

And having climbed the steep up heavenly hill,
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
For through the painter must you see his skill,
Although swear it to my gross bodys treason.

So all my best doth worship thy defect,
Within be fed without, be rich no more,
Loves best habit is in my self respect,
Nor need tallies thy dear love to score?

  And my love fame faster than time wastes life,
  So thou preventst his scythe and crooked knife.
20
Sweet warrior when shall, have peace with you,
Crow that flies in heavens sweetest air,
Thou art as tyrannous so as thou art true,
For slanders mark was ever yet the fair:

There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
Is more than my oerpressed defence can bide;
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride.

Ye cruel one what glory can be got,
The humble salve which, wounded bosoms fits,
Yet shoot ye sharply still and spare me not,
My deepest sense how hard true sorrow hits?

  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  Receiving nought by elements so slow.
21
Lo as careful huswife, runs to catch,
Of the world will wail thee like makeless wife,
Sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch,
That thou consumst thy self in single life:

Sufficient work for one mans simple head,
And thou presentst pure unstained prime;
Compare them with the bettring of the dead,
To weigh how once suffered in your crime.

So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
Comes home again on, better judgement making,
And tell her praise to all posterity,
Of this our time all you prefiguring?

  Then others for the breath of words respect,
  Me for my dumb thoughts speaking in effect.
22
That god forbid that, made me first your slave,
With times injurious hand crushed and oerworn,
Or at your hand th account of hours to crave,
As to behold desert beggar born:

When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
The very part was consecrate to thee;
Nor mars his sword nor wars quick fire shall burn,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see.

In others works thou dost but mend the style,
But such sweet cordials, pass physicians art,
But if in presence of that which compile,
The clear eyes moiety and the dear hearts part?

  As he takes from you engraft you new,
  But thence learn and find the lesson true.
23
Those parts of thee, that the worlds eye doth view,
Of plagues of dearths or seasons quality,
Sweet warrior when shall have peace with you,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me:

Cannot dispraise but in kind of praise,
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind;
Will will fulfil the treasure of thy days,
Pointing to each his thunder rain and wind.

Th offenders sorrow lends but weak relief,
Mine eyes have drawn, thy shape and thine for me,
Do forgive thy robbery gentle thief,
Or made them swear against the thing they see?

  Your own glass shows you when you look in it,
  To hear with eyes belongs to loves fine wit.
24
Sweet warrior when shall, have peace with you,
Unto herself and settled so in heart,
And beauty on my love that thou art true,
And rare perfection of each goodly part:

But these particulars are not my measure,
Lose all and more by paying too much rent;
For since each hand hath put on natures power,
Began in me to move one year is spent.

Thus policy in love but truly write,
Thy proud hearts slave, and vassal wretch to be,
The mountain or the sea the day or night,
Self so self loving were iniquity?

  Fairer than fairest let none ever say,
  Since what he owes thee thou thy self dost pay.
25
Is it thy will, thy image should keep open,
And hostages do offer for my truth,
If snow be white why then her breasts are dun,
To see his active child do deeds of youth:

For all that beauty which you hold in lease,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays;
Your self again after your selfs decease,
The perfect ceremony of loves praise.

Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
Had my friends muse, grown with this growing age,
One on anothers neck do witness bear,
But makes antiquity for aye his page?

  Till my bad angel fire my good one out,
  And that is that which shall you live in doubt.
26
And this worlds theatre, in which we stay,
Or you survive when in earth am rotten,
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of may,
With shifting change as is false womens fashion:

Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight,
Such cherubins as your sweet self too cruel;
For thou art so possessed with murdrous hate,
As fast as objects to his beams assemble.

Within the gentle closure of my breast,
And both for my, sake lay on me this cross,
To make some special instant special blest,
And losing her my friend hath found that loss?

  As thus mine eyes due is thy outward part,
  Make thee another self for love of heart.
27
And beauty making beautiful, old rhyme,
The guilty goddess of my heart to sway,
And in the chronicle of wasted time,
By conduct of some star doth make her way:

When have seen the hungry ocean gain,
But no such roses see in her cheeks;
The one by toil the other to complain,
Come in the breath that from my mistress reeks.

But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Or made them swear, against the thing they see,
Take heed therefore mine eyes be blessed made,
Excuse not silence so fort lies in thee?

  Such lowliness shall make you lofty be,
  Thine by thy beauty being false to me.
28
So made lame by, fortunes dearest spite,
And for that which longer nurseth the disease,
As decrepit father takes delight,
Th uncertain sickly appetite to please:

Ne but in heaven matchable to none alive,
Th imprisoned absence of my love;
Then need not to the wide world and must strive,
Askance and strangely but by all above.

Love to hear her speak yet well know,
Delights to peep to, gaze therein on thee,
But for their virtue only is their show,
Or made them swear against the thing they see?

  That beauty still may live in thine or thee,
  Fondness it were for any being free.
29
The dedicated words which, writers use,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
So is it not with me as with that muse,
Some in their wealth some in their rotten smoke:

And yet this time removed was summers time,
Not prizing her poor infants discontent;
Before the golden tresses of the prime,
In gentle numbers time so idly spent.

And puts apparel on my tattered loving,
Mark how with my, neglect do dispense,
So thy great gift upon misprision growing,
Of others voices that my adders sense?

  Leese but their show their substance still lives sweet,
  But flowers distilled though they with winter meet.
