0
Kissing with golden face, the meadows green,
And therefore to your fair no painting set,
As to make our appetite more keen,
That barren tender of poets debt:

Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned,
Against strange maladies sovereign cure;
In other accents do this praise confound,
Dateless lively heat still to endure.

Alas why fearing of times tyranny,
Crowning the present doubting, of the rest,
Him in thy heart which will keep so chary,
More than that tongue that more hath more expressed?

  Incapable of more replete with you,
  Hate from hate away she threw.
1
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem,
To make me travel forth without my cloak,
How much more doth beauty beauteous seem,
Some in their wealth some in their rotten smoke:

Give not windy night rainy morrow,
To bitter sauces did frame my feeding;
Then can drown an eye unused to flow,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring.

But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
That music hath far, more pleasing sound,
How would say mine eyes be blessed made,
My mistress when she walks treads on the ground?

  The worst was this my love may still shine bright,
  Or if they sleep thy picture in my sight.
2
When behold the violet, past prime,
That barren tender of poets debt,
When in the chronicle of wasted time,
And therefore to your fair no painting set:

Nor are mine cars with thy much clearer light,
Askance and strangely but by all above;
What needst thou wound with cunning when thy might,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.

Alas why fearing of times tyranny,
As not for my, sake lay on me this cross,
But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
And losing her my friend hath found that loss?

  Painting my age with beauty of thy days,
  Have eyes to wonder but lack tongues to praise.
3
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
Whose action is no stronger than flower,
But now my gracious numbers are decayed,
Nor services to do till you require:

Or say with princes if it shall go well,
And like unlettered clerk still cry amen;
But he that writes of you if he can tell,
Deserves the travail of worthier pen.

The sea all water yet receives rain still,
That is so proud, thy service to despise,
So thou being rich in will add to thy will,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?

  Let them say more that like of hearsay well,
  But if thou live remembered not to sell.
4
Lord of my love, be called idolatry,
And for that sorrow which then did feel,
Why lovst thou that which thou receivst not gladly,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel:

My self corrupting salving thy amiss,
To weigh how once suffered in your crime;
All men make faults and even in this,
And thou presentst pure unstained prime.

But out alack he was but one hour mine,
What acceptable audit canst, thou leave,
Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive?

  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so,
  If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.
5
Whilst many nymphs that, vowed chaste life to keep,
Whose strengths abundance weakens his own heart,
The little love god lying once asleep,
And with his fear is put beside his part:

Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown;
Then being asked where all thy beauty lies,
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own.

For have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
Doing thee vantage double, vantage me,
And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
Which for their habitation chose out thee?

  Unless this general evil they maintain,
  And that thou teachest how to make one twain.
6
When behold the violet, past prime,
But when she saw my self with thee partake,
Lo in the chronicle of wasted time,
And made my self all tyrant for thy sake:

An eye more bright than theirs less false in rolling,
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own;
Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing,
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.

So runst thou after that which flies from thee,
Dissuade one foolish heart, from serving thee,
And art made tongue tied by authority,
And all things turns to fair that eyes can see?

  When that shall fade my verse distills your truth,
  And so of you beauteous and lovely youth.
7
But tis my heart, that loves own hand painted,
Whose strengths abundance weakens his own heart,
Womans gentle heart but not acquainted,
Who with his fear is put beside his part:

And for my self mine own worth do define,
Than that which on thy humour doth depend;
Or if it do not from those lips of thine,
That in the least of them my life hath end.

Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
To change your day, of youth to sullied night,
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days,
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight?

  As with your shadow with these did play,
  Since what he owes thee thou thy self dost pay.
8
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
My tongue tied muse in manners holds her still,
And do not drop in for an after loss:

So are those errors that in your report,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
How far modern quill doth come too short,
The very part was consecrate to thee.

May be straight though they themselves be bevel,
Doing thee vantage double, vantage me,
No am that am and they that level,
Excuse not silence so fort lies in thee?

  Thine by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  Suns of the world or else this glutton be.
9
Say that thou didst, forsake me for some fault,
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give,
Speak of my lameness and straight will halt,
No longer yours than you your self here live:

Anon permit the basest clouds to ride,
Even such beauty as you master now;
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Of hand of foot of lip of eye of brow.

Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
That is so proud, thy service to despise,
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?

  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
  Thus have had thee as dream doth flatter.
10
Who will believe my, verse in time to come,
And all my comfort of thy worth and truth,
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
To see his active child do deeds of youth:

Then thou whose will is large and spacious,
That heavens air in this huge rondure hems;
If could write the beauty of your neer cloying sweetness,
With sun and moon with earth and seas rich gems.

But for their virtue only is their show,
Save what is had, or must from you be took,
Grant never saw goddess go,
And by and by and by clean starved for look?

  So long lives this and this gives life to thee,
  So long lives this and this shall ever be.
11
From you have been, absent in the spring,
Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my pain,
That did not better for my possessing,
My tongue tied patience with too much disdain:

And every fair from fair sometime declines,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet;
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And taught it thus anew to greet.

As victors of my silence cannot boast,
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
He nor that affable familiar ghost,
Drawn after you you pattern of all those?

  Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
12
Thus is his cheek, the map of days outworn,
Than public means which public manners breeds,
In act thy bed vow broke and new faith torn,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds:

When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
Ay fill it full with wills and my will one;
Nor mars his sword nor wars quick fire shall burn,
Since mind at first in character was done.

Sick withal the help of bath desired,
That wear this world, out to the gaudy spring,
That our night of woe might have remembered,
And tender churl makst waste in niggarding?

  Or gluttoning on all or all away,
  Yet him for this my love was my decay.
13
Then let not my, love shall be thy defect,
Called to that audit by advised respects,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
When shall see thee frown on my defects:

So should that beauty which you hold in lease,
Hath dear religious love stoln from mine eye;
Your self again after your selfs decease,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie.

Let me excuse thee ah my love well knows,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived,
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
Hath motion and mine eye may be deceived?

  These offices so oft as thou wilt look,
  Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
14
Which shall above that, idle rank remain,
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Let me confess that we two must be twain,
Unlooked for joy in that honour most:

And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride,
Which steals mens eyes and womens souls amazeth.

And to be sure that is in my seeing,
And on just proof, surmise accumulate,
Are windows to my self almost despising,
From sullen earth sings hymns at heavens gate?

  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
  But heres the joy my friend and assure ye.
15
Which alters when it, alteration finds,
That heavy saturn laughed and leaped with him,
Give warning to the marriage of true minds,
When proud pied april dressed in all his trim:

Most true it is an ever fixed mark,
Deserves the travail of worthier pen;
It is the star to every wandring bark,
And like unlettered clerk still cry amen.

But wherefore says she not she is unjust,
To tie up envy, evermore enlarged,
And to be sure that is in seeming trust,
Either not assailed or victor being charged?

  Even to thy pure and most most loving breast,
  Then give me welcome next my heaven the best.
16
Say that thou didst, forsake me for some fault,
My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
Speak of my lameness and straight will halt,
Wherein should your great deserts repay:

What excuse will my poor beast then find,
Is poorly imitated after you;
Then should spur though mounted on the wind,
Where all the treasure of his living hue.

But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Of others voices that, my adders sense,
How would say mine eyes be blessed made,
Mark how with my neglect do dispense?

  Thus have had thee as dream doth flatter,
  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer.
17
No longer mourn for, me when am dead,
With lines and wrinkles when his youthful morn,
Or if they have where is my judgment fled,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn:

When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
Loves eye is not so true as all mens no;
Nor mars his sword nor wars quick fire shall burn,
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so.

For to no other pass my verses tend,
They had not skill, enough your worth to sing,
But beautys waste hath in the world an end,
Of this our time all you prefiguring?

  Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  Mine ransoms yours and yours must ransom me.
18
Dost thou desire my, slumbers should be broken,
Roses have thorns and silver fountains mud,
And will thy image should keep open,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud:

For whos so dumb that cannot write to thee,
With ugly rack on his celestial face;
Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
But is profaned if not lives in disgrace.

Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
But bears it out, even to the heart,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part?

  These offices so oft as thou wilt look,
  Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
19
Whilst whom fortune of, such triumph bars,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote,
Let those who are in favour with their stars,
My bonds in thee thousand errors note:

Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
To find where your true image pictured lies;
For whether beauty birth or wealth or wit,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.

So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
Of others voices that, my adders sense,
Bearing thy heart which will keep so chary,
Mark how with my neglect do dispense?

  Suns of the world or else this glutton be,
  Even that your trespass now becomes fee.
20
That you were once, unkind befriends me now,
That barren tender of poets debt,
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
And therefore to your fair no painting set:

Tell me thou seest the twilight of such day,
Were an all eating shame and thriftless praise;
So for fear of trust forget to say,
When was wont to greet it with my lays.

Him in thy creation did decree,
But love for love, thus shall excuse my jade,
Alas why fearing of times tyranny,
They live unwooed and unrespected fade?

  And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
  All men are bad and in their badness reign.
21
Whilst alone did call, upon thy aid,
While shadows like to thee my true spirit,
Since every one hath every one one shade,
That may express my love or thy dear merit:

Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
As all other in all worths surmount;
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
No shape so true no truth of such account.

Which is not mixed with seconds knows no art,
That they elsewhere might, dart their injuries,
Let me be obsequious in thy heart,
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies?

  Then others for the breath of words respect,
  That for my dumb thoughts speaking in effect.
22
Womans gentle heart but, not acquainted,
So long as youth and thou are of one date,
Womans face with natures own hand painted,
All alone beweep my outcast state:

As interest of the dead which now appear,
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange;
How many holy and obsequious tear,
To set form upon desired change.

How would say mine eyes be blessed made,
The sun it self, it only live and die,
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie?

  For nothing this wide universe call,
  Her love for whose dear love rise and fall.
23
So am as the, riper should by time decease,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain,
From fairest creatures we desire increase,
My tongue tied patience with too much disdain:

Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
Like widowed wombs after their lords decease;
Or if it do not from those lips of thine,
The teeming autumn big with rich increase.

Gainst death and all oblivious enmity,
And tender churl makst, waste in niggarding,
Of more delight than hawks and horses be,
Three themes in one one pleasing note do sing?

  Towards thee ill run and give him leave to go,
  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
24
Those hours that with, gentle work did frame,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant time,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name,
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme:

Loving offenders thus will excuse ye,
What thou dost foist upon us that is old;
Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
Than think that we before have heard them told.

When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Thy looks should nothing, thence but sweetness tell,
And this my hand against my self respect,
Though in thy face sweet love should ever dwell?

  If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
  Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee.
25
Kissing with golden face, the meadows green,
Hath been before how are our brains beguiled,
As to prevent our maladies unseen,
And precious phrase by all the muses filed:

But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Times thievish progress to eternity;
The age to come would say this poet lies,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

And by this will be gainer too,
Slandering creation with false, esteem,
But that is in my thought whose love to you,
Before joy proposed behind dream?

  But weep to have what thou dost common grow,
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
26
No more be grieved, at that which is so deemed,
Of plagues of dearths or seasons quality,
Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed,
Beyond all date even to eternity:

If it do not when my heart committed,
And you in grecian tires are painted new;
Nor are mine cars with thy tongues tune delighted,
And steal dead seeming of his living hue.

One on anothers neck do witness bear,
Leaving thee living in, posterity,
So should the lines of life that life repair,
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee?

  Till then not show my head where thou mayst take,
  Think all but one and me most wretchcd make.
27
Whilst whom fortune of, such triumph bars,
All alone beweep my outcast state,
Let those who are in favour with their stars,
Breathed forth the sound that said hate:

That over goes my blunt invention quite,
Whereto th inviting time our fashion calls;
Nativity once in the main of light,
It suffers not in smiling pomp nor falls.

Who lead thee in their riot even there,
Three themes in one, one pleasing note do sing,
Ay me but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
Or me to whom thou gavst it else mistaking?

  These offices so oft as thou wilt look,
  Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
28
Or whether doth my, mind being crowned with you,
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light,
All tongues the voice of souls give thee that due,
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite:

Of faults concealed wherein am attainted,
Feedst thy lights flame with self substantial fuel;
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
Such cherubins as your sweet self too cruel.

Where beautys veil doth cover every blot,
For beautys pattern to, succeeding men,
To critic and to be sure that is not,
Which this times pencil or my pupil pen?

  Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds,
  And thence this slander as think proceeds.
29
Is it thy will, thy image should keep open,
For as you were when first your eye eyed,
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
Have from the forests shook three summers pride:

Just to the ear that doth thy lays esteem,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed;
Return forgetful muse and straight redeem,
By chance or natures changing course untrimmed.

Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
From whence at pleasure, thou mayst come and part,
But that so much as my poor name rehearse,
And constant stars in them read such art?

  Who art as black as hell as dark as night,
  None unless this miracle have might.
