0
Such seems your beauty, still three winters cold,
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
To me fair friend you never can be old,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant time:

Why should others false adulterate eyes,
As the perfumed tincture of the roses;
The age to come would say this poet lies,
When summers breath their masked buds discloses.

So runst thou after that which flies from thee,
And constant stars in, them read such art,
To what you will to you as you to me,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part?

  Being had to triumph being lacked to hope,
  Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope.
1
For shame deny that, thou forgetst so long,
That am debarred the benefit of rest,
Spendst thou thy fury on some worthless song,
But day by night and night by day oppressed:

Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
To know my shames and praises from your sight;
But thou wilt not nor he will not be so bold,
For precious friends hid in deaths dateless night.

But my five wits nor my five senses can,
What acceptable audit canst, thou leave,
Who leaves unswayed the likeness of man,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive?

  In days long since before these last so bad,
  Him she stores to show what wealth she had.
2
My tongue tied muse, in manners holds her still,
Drink up the monarchs plague this flattery,
Some in their garments though new fangled ill,
Loss in love that touches me more nearly:

And would corrupt my saint to be invited,
Deserves the travail of worthier pen;
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted,
He robs thee of and pays it thee again.

Of more delight than hawks and horses be,
Mine appetite never more, will grind,
But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
And age in love to whom am confined?

  In days long since before these last so bad,
  Him she stores to show what wealth she had.
3
Your love and pity, doth th impression fill,
Wherein should your great deserts repay,
My tongue tied muse in manners holds her still,
From limits far remote where thou dost stay:

Just to the time not with the time exchanged,
To truths translated and for true things deemed;
And sealed false bonds of love if have ranged,
The basest jewel will be well esteemed.

Whateer thy thoughts or thy hearts workings be,
And age in love, to whom am confined,
So runst thou after that which flies from thee,
Mine appetite never more will grind?

  And you must live drawn by your own sweet skill,
  Though you do any thing he thinks no ill.
4
Say that thou didst, forsake me for some fault,
Crow that flies in heavens sweetest air,
Speak of my lameness and straight will halt,
For slanders mark was ever yet the fair:

For where is she so fair whose uneared womb,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes;
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
To find where your true image pictured lies.

Then were not summers distillation left,
They live unwooed and, unrespected fade,
Beautys effect with beauty were bereft,
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made?

  Thine by thy beauty being false to me,
  That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
5
How can my muse, want subject to times hate,
For as you were when first your eye eyed,
If my dear love were but the child of state,
Have from the forests shook three summers pride:

And would corrupt my saint to be devil,
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown;
To win me soon to hell my female evil,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone.

Yet be most proud of that which flies from thee,
The ills that were, not grew to faults assured,
Of more delight than hawks and horses be,
Which rank of goodness would by ill be cured?

  Praising thy worth despite his cruel hand,
  You are so strongly in my verse shall stand.
6
As an unperfect actor, on the stage,
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:

And so the general of hot desire,
So great sum of sums yet canst not live;
For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,
The bounteous largess given thee to give.

And ruined love when it is built anew,
By looking on thee, in the living day,
Hearing you praised say tis so tis true,
Or state it self confounded to decay?

  They draw but what they see know not the heart,
  In all external grace you have some part.
7
Those hours that with, gentle work did frame,
Laid by his side his heart inflaming brand,
Is perjured murdrous bloody full of blame,
Came tripping by but in her maiden hand:

Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate,
To dry the rain on my storm beaten face;
For thou art so possessed with murdrous hate,
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace.

And do so love yet when they have devised,
And sweets grown common, lose their dear delight,
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized,
When other petty griefs have done their spite?

  Pity me then dear friend and assure ye,
  And thou all they hast all the all of me.
8
In loving thee thou, knowst am forsworn,
The second burthen of former child,
In act thy bed vow broke and new faith torn,
Hath been before how are our brains beguiled:

How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted,
Since mind at first in character was done;
Thou art and therefore to be invited,
Advantage on the kingdom of the sun.

And ruined love when it is greater grief,
To change your day, of youth to sullied night,
Th offenders sorrow lends but weak relief,
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight?

  So shall thou feed on death that feeds on men,
  And death once dead theres no more dying then.
9
Why lovst thou that, which thou receivst not gladly,
Unmoved cold and to temptation slow,
Music to hear why hearst thou music sadly,
And do not do the thing they most do show:

When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
To find where your true image pictured lies;
Nor mars his sword nor wars quick fire shall burn,
Closet never pierced with crystal eyes.

Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Which for their habitation, chose out thee,
Be as thy presence is gracious and kind,
Leaving thee living in posterity?

  But if the while think on thee dear friend,
  All losses are restored and sorrows end.
10
That thou art cruel, do not glance aside,
From hands of falsehood in sure wards of trust,
Love is my verse so barren of new pride,
Is lust in action and till action lust:

And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
And broils root out the work of masonry;
But these particulars are not my measure,
And wear their brave state out of memory.

Is from the book of honour razed quite,
And in abundance addeth, to his store,
As any mothers child though not so bright,
Within be fed without be rich no more?

  If thou turn back and my loud crying still,
  All this away and me in that one will.
11
The charter of thy, worth with manners may sing,
And found such fair assistance in my heart,
From you have been absent in the spring,
For still temptation follows where thou art:

The fairest votary took up that fire,
How would thy shadows form form happy show;
For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,
No news but health from their physicians know.

Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
Grows fairer than at, first more strong far greater,
Since spite of him ill live in this poor rhyme,
The crow or dove it shapes them to your feature?

  If thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings,
  That then scorn to change my state with kings.
12
When my love to, me bore the canopy,
Nor services to do till you require,
Since brass nor stone nor earth nor boundless sea,
Should in thought control your times of pleasure:

For it no form delivers to the learneds wing,
And says in him thy fair appearance lies;
Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.

Love to you as you to me then tendered,
And thither hied sad, distempered guest,
Sick withal the help of bath desired,
More than that tongue that more hath more expressed?

  Let no unkind no fair beseechers kill,
  If thou turn back and my loud crying still.
13
Since all alike my, songs and praises be,
Than this rich praise that you alone are you,
How with this rage shall beauty hold plea,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew:

Thats for thy self to breed another thee,
Of hand of foot of lip of eye of brow;
Loving offenders thus will excuse ye,
Even such beauty as you master now.

So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
Thy looks should nothing, thence but sweetness tell,
The coward conquest of wretchs knife,
Guess one angel in anothers hell?

  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me,
  That all the world or else this glutton be.
14
Wound me not with, thine eye but with mine eyes,
So do our minutes hasten to their end,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:

So for fear of trust forget to say,
Deserves the travail of worthier pen;
For thou betraying me do betray,
He robs thee of and pays it thee again.

So should my papers yellowed with their age,
Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new,
And your true rights be termed poets rage,
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view?

  So long lives this and this shall ever be,
  Mine ransoms yours and yours must ransom me.
15
Since every one hath, every one one shade,
And made my self am mortgaged to thy will,
What is your substance whereof are you made,
The worser spirit woman coloured ill:

Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet;
Simply credit her false speaking tongue,
And taught it thus anew to greet.

Love to you as you to me then tendered,
And make times spoils, despised everywhere,
That our night of woe might have remembered,
Had having and in my love is as fair?

  Then will swear beauty herself is black,
  And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
16
Womans gentle heart but, not acquainted,
Although in me each part will be forgotten,
Womans face with natures own hand painted,
Hast thou the master mistress of my passion:

Then should spur though mounted on the wind,
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind;
What excuse will my poor beast then find,
By oft predict that in heaven find.

Until lifes composition be recured,
What acceptable audit canst, thou leave,
Who even but now come back again assured,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive?

  If thou turn back and my loud crying still,
  All this away and me in that one will.
17
To me fair friend, you never can be old,
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight,
Never say that thou mayst in me behold,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might:

And in mine own loves strength seem to decay,
When summers breath their masked buds discloses;
My soul doth tell my body that he may,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces.

How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
It is my love, that keeps mine eye awake,
If any be satire to decay,
To play the watchman ever for thy sake?

  Then lacked matter that enfeebled mine,
  But when your countenance filled up his line.
18
As an unperfect actor, on the way,
Or else receivst with pleasure thine annoy,
But do thy worst to steal thy self away,
Sweets with sweets war not joy delights in joy:

Beauty no pencil beautys truth to lay,
Since first saw you fresh which yet are green;
Nay if thou lourst on me do betray,
Some fresher stamp of the seasons have seen.

And gainst my self almost despising,
And die as fast, as they see others grow,
Love alters not with his gust is greeing,
The one doth shadow of your beauty show?

  Such is my love still telling what is told,
  For as the sun is daily new and old.
19
Womans face with natures, own hand did make,
The worser spirit woman coloured ill,
Weret aught to me that languished for her sake,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:

But thou wilt not nor he will not be free,
Were an all eating shame and thriftless praise;
For whos so dumb that cannot write to thee,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays.

Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
That thou among the, wastes of time must go,
Look what an unthrift in the world an end,
The one doth shadow of your beauty show?

  Pity the world well knows yet none knows well,
  Am to wait though waiting so be hell.
