0
No more be grieved, at that which thou hast done,
Witness the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
And do not drop in for an after loss:

And therefore art enforced to seek anew,
Desire is death which physic did except;
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept.

Be as thy presence is gracious and kind,
By love himself and, in the living day,
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Shall turn to calms and timely clear away?

  As any she belied with false compare,
  Or call it winter which being full of care.
1
Whilst alone did call, upon thy aid,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud,
The which three times thrice happy hath me made,
Roses have thorns and silver fountains mud:

Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
How can then be elder than thou art;
Is it thy spirit that thou sendst from thee,
And long entreaty soften her hard heart.

Then vouchsafe me but this loving thought,
Hath motion and mine, eye may be deceived,
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
Steal from his figure and no pace perceived?

  Since what he owes thee thou thy self dost pay,
  Or gluttoning on all or all away.
2
Doth part his function, and is partly blind,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste,
To let base clouds oertake me in my mind,
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste:

That she will whose will is large and spacious,
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
The fair idea of your neer cloying sweetness,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew.

Yet hope well that when it is built anew,
And that in guess, they measure by thy side,
That is true beauty that doth argue you,
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide?

  Unless this general evil they maintain,
  Then think not long in taking little pain.
3
Or laid great bases, for eternity,
Made old offences of affections new,
When my love that thou bearst love to any,
What wondrous virtue is contained in you:

Nothing sweet boy but yet like prayers divine,
And all those beauties whereof now hes king;
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
To bitter sauces did frame my feeding.

Who lead thee in their riot even there,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride,
One on anothers neck do witness bear,
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide?

  Yet since your light hath once enlumined me,
  That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
4
My mistress eyes are, nothing like the sun,
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
For still temptation follows where thou art:

For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
Desire is death which physic did except;
Or how comes it that my name receives brand,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept.

That is true beauty that doth argue you,
To play the mothers, part kiss me be kind,
So all my best is dressing old words new,
To take new acquaintance of thy mind?

  Whiles she as steel and flint doth still remain,
  And think they die with pleasure live with pain.
5
In the old age, black was not counted fair,
Without all bail shall carry me away,
But now is black beautys successive heir,
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay:

My saucy bark inferior far to his,
Such cherubins as your sweet self too cruel;
They rightly do inherit heavens graces,
The silly lamb that to his beams assemble.

Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
But such sweet cordials, pass physicians art,
That is not mixed with seconds knows no art,
The clear eyes moiety and the dear hearts part?

  He pays the whole and yet know it not,
  But whats so blessed fair that fears no blot.
6
Since brass nor stone, nor earth nor boundless sea,
Unlooked for joy in that honour most,
How with this rage shall beauty hold plea,
Of public honour and proud titles boast:

Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
Give salutation to my gross bodys treason;
Or if it be your pleasure and proud will,
Since mind at first in character was done.

Yet shoot ye sharply still and spare me not,
Shall times best jewel, from times chest lie hid,
Where beautys veil doth cover every blot,
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?

  That on himself such murdrous shame commits,
  No love toward others in that bosom sits.
7
Since every one hath, every one one shade,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds,
Whilst alone did call upon thy aid,
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds:

If the true concord of well tuned sounds,
Divert strong minds to the course of altring things;
They do but sweetly chide thee who confounds,
Creep in twixt vows and change decrees of kings.

May be straight though they themselves be bevel,
And to his palate, doth prepare the cup,
That little that am and they that level,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up?

  Thou mayst be false and yet know it not,
  But whats so blessed fair that fears no blot.
8
As an unperfect actor, on the stage,
When yellow leaves or none or few do hang,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang:

Or how comes it that my name receives brand,
Which should transport me farthest from your sight;
To what it works in like the dyers hand,
And given to time your own dear purchased right.

Beautys effect with beauty were bereft,
Which rank of goodness, would by ill be cured,
Then were not summers distillation left,
The ills that were not grew to faults assured?

  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
  In sleep king but waking no such matter.
9
And there reigns love, and all loves loving parts,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel,
Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell:

Just to the sun for they have purer sight,
Whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never;
And happy lines on which with starry light,
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure.

For she hath no exchequer now but his,
The clear eyes moiety, and the dear hearts part,
My name be buried where my body is,
The inward langour of my wounded heart?

  Towards thee ill run and give him leave to go,
  Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe.
10
Thy gift thy tables, are within my brain,
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer,
Let me confess that we two must be twain,
But sad mortality oersways their power:

Do envy those jacks that nimble leap,
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind;
When every private widow well may keep,
By childrens eyes her husbands shape in mind.

Therefore to give them from me was bold,
That sometimes anger thrusts, into his hide,
For nothing hold me so it please thee hold,
He of tall building and of goodly pride?

  Lest eyes well seeing thy foul faults should find,
  And gain by ills thrice more than in my mind.
11
Cupid laid by his, brand and fell asleep,
With beautys treasure ere it be self killed,
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep,
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled:

And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
For precious friends hid in deaths dateless night;
Fair soil it seems from far where abide,
To feed his fill flys back unto your sight.

As those two mourning eyes become thy face,
As those gold candles, fixed in heavens air,
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace,
If time have any wrinkle graven there?

  And even thence thou wilt be stoln fear,
  From me far off with others all too near.
12
My tongue tied muse, in manners holds her still,
And like enough thou knowst thy estimate,
Whoever hath her wish thou hast thy will,
Breathed forth the sound that said hate:

Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
To weigh how once suffered in your crime;
Making couplement of proud compare,
And thou presentst pure unstained prime.

But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
From thy behaviour beauty, doth he give,
And simple truth miscalled simplicity,
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live?

  Give them thy fingers me thy lips to kiss,
  To shun the heaven that leads men to this.
13
If thou wilt thou, art cruel do not press,
From hands of falsehood in sure wards of trust,
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust:

Yet nor in field nor bower her can find,
Deaths second self that seals up all in rest;
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
Doth half that glory to the sober west.

Perhaps he there may learn with rare delight,
Whilst that this shadow, doth such substance give,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
To leave for nothing all thy glory live?

  Save breed to brave him when he takes thee hence,
  And nothing gainst times scythe can make defence.
14
How sweet and lovely, dost thou to mine eyes,
And like enough thou knowst thy estimate,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
So long as youth and thou are of one date:

But why of two oaths breach do accuse thee,
Is more than my oerpressed defence can bide;
That use is not forbidden usury,
Th imprisoned absence of your pride.

Mark how one string sweet husband to another,
Or made them swear, against the thing they see,
Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee?

  So shall thou feed on death that feeds on men,
  And death once dead theres no more dying then.
15
When consider every thing, that grows,
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows,
Unlooked for joy in that honour most:

Nothing sweet boy but yet like prayers divine,
So that my self bring water for my stain;
As ill my self mine own worth do define,
He robs thee of and pays it thee again.

In him those holy antique hours are seen,
And then believe me, my love is as fair,
Making no summer of anothers green,
If time have any wrinkle graven there?

  Such lowliness shall make you lofty be,
  But heres the joy my friend and assure ye.
16
If my dear love, were but the child of state,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Why is my sin and thy dear virtue hate,
And do not drop in for an after loss:

Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed;
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
By chance or natures changing course untrimmed.

Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake,
Fed on the ashes, of his youth doth lie,
And sue friend came debtor for my sake,
To force me live and will not let me die?

  As she doth laugh at her in equal sort,
  As thus mine eyes due is thy good report.
17
For shame deny that, thou bearst love to call,
Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend,
Take all my loves my love yea take them all,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend:

Beauty no pencil beautys truth to lay,
That heavens air in this huge rondure hems;
So for fear of trust forget to say,
With sun and moon with earth and seas rich gems.

So thy great gift upon misprision growing,
Which husbandry in honour, might uphold,
That is in my self almost despising,
And barren rage of deaths eternal cold?

  This told joy but then no longer glad,
  Him she stores to show what wealth she had.
18
That thou art cruel, do not glance aside,
That am debarred the benefit of rest,
For my sake do you with fortune chide,
But day by night and night by day oppressed:

In our two loves there is but one respect,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
Which though it alter not loves sole effect,
Which steals mens eyes and womens souls amazeth.

Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
Shall turn to calms, and timely clear away,
But out alack he was but one hour mine,
By looking on thee in the living day?

  The constancy and virtue of your might,
  The worst was this my love shall in my sight.
19
Before these bastard signs, of fair were born,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant time,
In loving thee thou knowst am forsworn,
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme:

And patience tame to sufferance bide each check,
And thou presentst pure unstained prime;
Let me suffer being at your beck,
And do whateer thou wilt swift footed time.

Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Mine eyes have drawn, thy shape and thine for me,
And soon to you as my poor name rehearse,
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee?

  And so should you to love can allege no cause,
  To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws.
20
Those pretty wrongs that, liberty commits,
And like enough thou knowst thy estimate,
Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,
Breathed forth the sound that said hate:

Three april perfumes in three hot junes burned,
One thing expressing leaves out difference;
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned,
To sing the glory of their excellence.

Who lead thee in their riot even there,
And haply of our, old acquaintance tell,
One on anothers neck do witness bear,
To mar the subject that before was well?

  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
21
Thy bosom is endeared, with all hearts,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds,
And there reigns love and all loves loving parts,
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds:

Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
And like unlettered clerk still cry amen;
Or who is he so fond will be so bold,
Deserves the travail of worthier pen.

Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Without all ornament it, self and true,
What happy title do find,
But love for love speak well of me untrue?

  Wretched in this alone that thou dost hide,
  Bear thine eyes straight though thy proud heart go wide.
22
The merry cuckoo messenger, of spring,
Than public means which public manners breeds,
That did not better for my possessing,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds:

To follow that which flies before her face,
For with the goodly semblance of her hue;
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
When you have bid your servant once adieu.

Why should my papers yellowed with their age,
Or made them swear, against the thing they see,
And your true rights be termed poets rage,
Self so self loving were iniquity?

  For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
  Lest eyes well seeing thy foul faults should find.
23
What can mine own, praise to mine eyes best see,
Which should example where your equal grew,
Since all alike my songs and praises be,
What wondrous virtue is contained in you:

And humbled hearts brings captives unto thee,
Is more than my oerpressed defence can bide;
Loving offenders thus will excuse ye,
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride.

To be so tickled they would change their state,
Whilst he upon your, soundless deep doth ride,
Oer whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
By new unfolding his imprisoned pride?

  But since she pricked thee out for womens pleasure,
  In sleep king but waking no such matter.
24
As an unperfect actor, on the stage,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
From hands of falsehood in sure wards of trust:

But as she is of the watery main,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
The one by toil the other to complain,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see.

To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
And my great mind, most kingly drinks it up,
So that eternal love in loves fresh case,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup?

  And wish that more and greater they might be,
  That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
25
Reserve their character with, golden quill,
Your goodly self for evermore to view,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Made old offences of affections new:

Most true it is an ever fixed mark,
Is poorly imitated after you;
Fair when her breast like rich laden bark,
And steal dead seeming of his living hue.

Ay me but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
Your self to pardon, of selfdoing crime,
One on anothers neck do witness bear,
That you your self may privilage your time?

  Towards thee ill run and give him leave to go,
  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
26
Fair is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds,
If my dear love were but the child of state,
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds:

Do envy those jacks that nimble leap,
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so;
The world will be thy widow and still weep,
When swift extremity can seem but slow.

Whether we are mended or whether better they,
Or whether revolution be, the view,
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
But love for love speak well of me untrue?

  No want of conscience hold it that call,
  Her love for whose dear love rise and fall.
27
And for the peace, of you hold such strife,
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell,
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:

Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned,
And keep invention in noted weed;
In other accents do this praise confound,
Showing their birth and where they did proceed.

If any be satire to decay,
Commit to these waste, blanks and thou shalt find,
Rise resty muse my loves sweet face survey,
To take new acquaintance of thy mind?

  Let no unkind no fair beseechers kill,
  That in your breast his leaf and love that still.
28
And his love kindling, fire did quickly steep,
My simple meaning with disdainful scorn,
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn:

There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
And keep invention in noted weed;
Tomorrow see again and do not kill,
Showing their birth and where they did proceed.

Who even but now come back again assured,
Whilst thy babe chase, thee afar behind,
Until lifes composition be recured,
To take new acquaintance of thy mind?

  So long lives this and this with thee remains,
  Then thank him not for that which it contains.
29
But when in disgrace, with fortune chide,
All alone beweep my outcast state,
That thou art cruel do not glance aside,
So long as youth and thou are of one date:

The world will be thy widow and still weep,
No news but health from their physicians know;
Do envy those jacks that nimble leap,
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so.

For to the summer is less pleasant now,
That they elsewhere might, dart their injuries,
Him in thy course untainted do allow,
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies?

  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me,
  Die single and thine image dies with thee.
