0
My self ill forfeit, so that other mine,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still,
So now have confessed that he is thine,
The worser spirit woman coloured ill:

Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays;
Nor dare chide the world without end hour,
Were an all eating shame and thriftless praise.

The injuries that to my self respect,
What acceptable audit canst, thou leave,
So all my best doth worship thy defect,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive?

  All men are bad and in my verse can sit,
  Your own glass shows you when you look in it.
1
Canst thou cruel say, love thee with mine eyes,
That thou consumst thy self in single life,
Mine eye my heart that loves what they despise,
The world will wail thee like makeless wife:

Three april perfumes in three hot junes burned,
And broils root out the work of masonry;
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

Like to the lark at break of day arising,
Which for their habitation, chose out thee,
And puts apparel on my tattered loving,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty?

  To be deaths conquest and make worms thine heir,
  Makes summers welcome thrice more wished more rare.
2
And trouble deaf heaven, with my bootless cries,
That thou consumst thy self in single life,
When in disgrace with fortune and mens eyes,
Now while the world will wail thee like makeless wife:

Why should poor beauty indirectly seek,
To find where your true image pictured lies;
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
Closet never pierced with crystal eyes.

And to be sure that is in my seeing,
Shall you pace forth, your praise shall still find room,
Thy self thou gavst thy own worth then not knowing,
And only herald to the ending doom?

  Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book,
  These offices so oft as thou wilt look.
3
Dost thou desire my, slumbers should be broken,
Than when it hath my duty strongly knit,
And will thy image should keep open,
To witness duty not to show my wit:

For if you were by my unkindness shaken,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;
Of him my self and thee am forsaken,
And you in grecian tires are painted new.

In others works thou dost but mend the style,
Whilst he upon your, soundless deep doth ride,
So runst thou after that which compile,
And that in guess they measure by thy side?

  And see thy blood warm when thou feelst it cold,
  For as the sun is daily new and old.
4
So is it for, fear to wet widows eye,
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell,
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:

How far modern quill doth come too short,
Or any of these all or all or more;
So are those errors that in your report,
Increasing store with loss and loss with store.

Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Shall times best jewel, from times chest lie hid,
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse,
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?

  Where time and outward form would show it dead,
  And more much more than in my purpose bred.
5
Upon thy side against, my love depends,
If hairs be wires black wires grow on her head,
Then let not my love shall be thy amends,
Coral is far more red than her lips red:

Kind is my home of love as oft as mine,
As soon as think the place where he would be;
Or if it do not from those lips of thine,
The living record of your memory.

And gainst my self lawful plea commence,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride,
For to thy sensual fault bring in sense,
And in abundance addeth to his side?

  Bear thine eyes straight though thy proud heart go wide,
  Where may not be so nor thou belied.
6
Thus is his cheek, the map of days outworn,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed,
Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
And my self with thee wherever abide:

So are those errors that in thee are seen,
To kiss the tender inward of thy deeds;
Now stand you on the finger of throned queen,
And in my mind thy worst all best exceeds.

As those two mourning eyes become thy face,
Nor double penance to, correct correction,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
Potions of eisel gainst my strong infection?

  Or gluttoning on all or all away,
  Since what he owes thee thou thy self dost pay.
7
Full many glorious morning, have seen,
Now is the time that face should form another,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Loss in love with sighs himself doth smother:

Loving offenders thus will excuse ye,
Ere beautys dead fleece made another gay;
For whos so dumb that cannot write to thee,
Without this folly age and cold decay.

Alas why fearing of times tyranny,
The region cloud hath, masked him from me now,
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
With all triumphant splendour on my brow?

  And him as for map doth nature store,
  To show false art what beauty was of yore.
8
Look in thy glass, and tell the face thou viewest,
With shifting change as is false womens fashion,
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Although in me each part will be forgotten:

That record could with backward look,
How can then be elder than thou art;
Show me your image in some antique book,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart.

Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
Despite of wrinkles this, thy golden time,
Mark how one string sweet husband to another,
Your self to pardon of selfdoing crime?

  And even thence thou wilt be stoln fear,
  For truth proves thievish for prize so dear.
9
Rough winds do shake, the darling buds of may,
Of my sin grounded on sinful loving,
Doth teach that case and that repose to say,
When not to be receives reproach of being:

Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
As after sunset fadeth in the carcanet;
For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,
Since seldom coming in that long year set.

So should the lines of life that life repair,
Thy self to pardon, of selfdoing crime,
Who lead thee in their riot even there,
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time?

  Make thee another self for love of heart,
  In all external grace you have some part.
10
The first my thought, the other my desire,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day,
The other two slight air and purging fire,
Without all bail shall carry me away:

But he that writes of you if he can tell,
That heavens air in this huge rondure hems;
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell,
With sun and moon with earth and seas rich gems.

Th offenders sorrow lends but weak relief,
But love for love, thus shall excuse my jade,
Do forgive thy robbery gentle thief,
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made?

  But if the while think on thee dear friend,
  All losses are restored and sorrows end.
11
When my love to, me bore the canopy,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel,
That thou art cruel do not think on thee,
And for that sorrow which then did feel:

Crooked eclipses gainst his glory fight,
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
Was it his spirit by spirits taught to write,
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the sun.

So that eternal love in loves fresh case,
And captive good attending, captain ill,
Nor dare question with my desire keep pace,
And folly doctor like controlling skill?

  Than both your poets can in praise devise,
  So long lives this and dwell in lovers eyes.
12
Whats new to speak, what now to register,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay,
The first my thought the other my desire,
That do not do the thing she would have stay:

All men make faults and even in this,
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace;
My self corrupting salving thy amiss,
To dry the rain on my storm beaten face.

For to thy sensual fault bring in sense,
Before joy proposed behind, dream,
And gainst my self lawful plea commence,
Slandering creation with false esteem?

  And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
  By praising him here who doth hence remain.
13
Being your slave what, should do but tend,
And with his fear is put beside his part,
Have no precious time at all to spend,
For still temptation follows where thou art:

But thou wilt not nor he will not be free,
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied;
Is it thy spirit that thou sendst from thee,
Be anchored in the breath that from my side.

The statute of thy beauty do question make,
Despite of wrinkles this, thy golden time,
And sue friend came debtor for my sake,
Your self to pardon of selfdoing crime?

  For we which now behold these present days,
  The pain be mine but thine shall be the praise.
14
How can then return, in happy plight,
And made my self all tyrant for thy sake,
Doth homage to his new appearing sight,
And look upon my self with thee partake:

And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
And threescore year would make the world away;
Have not seen dwellers on form and favour,
Without this folly age and cold decay.

In others works thou dost but mend the style,
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made,
So runst thou after that which compile,
But love for love thus shall excuse my jade?

  Thine by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see.
15
If the dull substance, of my flesh were thought,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew,
That thou art beloved of many thing sought,
And summers lease hath all too precious you:

Thou art and therefore to be invited,
It suffers not in smiling pomp nor falls;
If it do not when my heart committed,
Whereto th inviting time our fashion calls.

Who leaves unswayed the likeness of man,
Whilst thy babe chase, thee afar behind,
But my five wits nor my five senses can,
And age in love to whom am confined?

  Compared with loss of thee this prognosticate,
  For thee against my self ill vow debate.
16
The dedicated words which, writers use,
That barren tender of poets debt,
As fast as thou art too dear for my muse,
And therefore to your fair no painting set:

Past reason hated as swallowed bait,
Against the wrackful siege of battring days;
Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight,
Were an all eating shame and thriftless praise.

How would say mine eyes be blessed made,
But shoot not at, me in your wakened hate,
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
From sullen earth sings hymns at heavens gate?

  Drugs poison him that so feil sick of you,
  My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.
17
But now my gracious, numbers are decayed,
The manner of my pity wanting pain,
What is your substance whereof are you made,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain:

Nothing sweet boy but yet like prayers divine,
And steal dead seeming of his living hue;
Or if it do not from those lips of thine,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew.

For have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
Nor draw no lines, there with thine antique pen,
And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
Can make you live your self in eyes of men?

  Yet him for this my love may still shine bright,
  In things right true my heart and eyes delight.
18
And for the peace, of you do write,
Whose strengths abundance weakens his own heart,
After my death dear love forget me quite,
And perspective it is best painters art:

If it do not when my heart committed,
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
Thou art and therefore to be invited,
And steal dead seeming of his living hue.

Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized,
Which works on leases, of short numbered hours,
Bearing thy heart that when they have devised,
That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers?

  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  Since from thee going he went wilful slow.
19
Feeding on that, which thou receivst not gladly,
Thou mayst call thine when thou art assured mine,
What can mine own praise to mine eyes best see,
And will comment upon that love of thine:

Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
For whether beauty birth or wealth or wit,
Though in our lives separable spite.

And by this will be gainer too,
That on the ashes, of his youth doth lie,
Hearing you praised say tis so tis true,
Or state it self it only live and die?

  Thy end is truths and beautys doom and date,
  And thou in this alone that thou dost hate.
