0
The little love god, lying once asleep,
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight:

An eye more bright than theirs less false in rolling,
Wooing his purity with her foul pride;
For how do hold thee but by thy granting,
In this as in the bay where all men ride.

As victors of my silence cannot boast,
Shall you pace forth, your praise shall still find room,
He nor that affable familiar ghost,
Mote soften it and to the ending doom?

  Let the world may stain when heavens sun staineth,
  The worst was this my love no whit disdaineth.
1
My mistress eyes are, nothing like the sun,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
From hands of falsehood in sure wards of trust:

So for fear of trust forget to say,
As if they knew the meaning of their lays;
She doth allure me to mine own decay,
Against the wrackful siege of battring days.

But what this verse that never shall expire,
Consumed with that which, it was nourished by,
The sparks whereof let kindle thine own fire,
To force me live and will not let me die?

  But thence learn and find the lesson true,
  My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.
2
Spendst thou thy fury, on some worthless song,
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Where art thou muse that thou forgetst so long,
Which have no correspondence with true sight:

Have not seen dwellers on form and favour,
And for that riches where is my deserving;
But these particulars are not my measure,
And so my patent back again is swerving.

The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
And both for my, sake lay on me this cross,
Bid her therefore herself soon ready make,
And losing her my friend hath found that loss?

  Than both your poets can in praise devise,
  There faith doth fearless dwell in lovers eyes.
3
Spendst thou thy fury, on some worthless song,
In mind to mount up to the weary night,
For shame deny that thou forgetst so long,
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite:

For all that beauty which you hold in lease,
When thou thy self dost give invention light;
Herein lives wisdom beauty and increase,
Though in our lives separable spite.

But beautys waste hath in the world doth spend,
Nor double penance to, correct correction,
On newer proof to try an older friend,
Potions of eisel gainst my strong infection?

  To covet fetters though they golden be,
  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
4
Men call you fair, and you do write,
Breathed forth the sound that said hate,
As decrepit father takes delight,
All alone beweep my outcast state:

Thats for thy self the thanks if aught in me,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend;
For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
And all those forty which my life hath end.

So your sweet hue which methinks still doth stand,
Whilst he upon your, soundless deep doth ride,
Ah yet doth beauty like dial hand,
As his triumphant prize proud of this pride?

  Came there for cure and this with thee remains,
  Then thank him not for that which it contains.
5
If my dear love, were but the child of state,
Unmoved cold and to temptation slow,
As subject to times love or to times hate,
And do not do the thing they most do show:

And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Whereto th inviting time our fashion calls;
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
It suffers not in smiling pomp nor falls.

My name be buried where my body is,
And sweets grown common, lose their dear delight,
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night?

  But let my thoughts behold herself in me,
  Fondness it were for any being free.
6
But all my days, in pining langor spend,
When not to be receives reproach of being,
Natures bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
Of my sin grounded on sinful loving:

Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight,
The teeming autumn big with rich increase;
Past reason hated as swallowed bait,
Like widowed wombs after their lords decease.

Love alters not with thy hours my loves gain,
With others thou shouldst, not abhor my state,
Both find each other and lose both twain,
Eternal numbers to outlive long date?

  Think all but one and me in that bosom sits,
  That on himself such murdrous shame commits.
7
If thou survive my, well contented day,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud,
But do thy worst to steal thy self away,
Roses have thorns and silver fountains mud:

Even for this let us divided live,
Or make agreement with her thrilling eyes;
That by this separation may give,
To find where your true image pictured lies.

To be so tickled they would change their state,
Save where you are, how happy you make those,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
Where you may be or your affairs suppose?

  Incapable of more replete with you,
  As he takes from you engraft you new.
8
Since every one hath, every one one shade,
Thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing,
Whilst alone did call upon thy aid,
To be receives reproach of being:

Not air for she is of the inner part,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace;
Or at the least so long as brain and heart,
Fairing the foul with arts false borrowed face.

And to be sure that is in seeming trust,
That you your self, may privilage your time,
But wherefore says she not she is unjust,
Calls back the lovely april of her prime?

  Let no unkind no fair beseechers kill,
  And you must live drawn by your own sweet skill.
9
From fairest creatures we, desire increase,
That do not do the thing she would have stay,
So am as the riper should by time decease,
Wherein should your great deserts repay:

Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind;
Then not on him that never thought you ill,
Beauteous thou art covetous and he is kind.

But for their virtue only is their show,
Though to it self, sees not till heaven clears,
Do you him take and in possession so,
That is so vexed with watching and with tears?

  Him she stores to show what wealth she had,
  This told joy but then no longer glad.
10
From fairest creatures we, desire increase,
To be receives reproach of being,
So am as the riper should by time decease,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving:

And yet this time removed was summers time,
As if they knew the meaning of their lays;
Reserve them for my love not for their rhyme,
Were an all eating shame and thriftless praise.

Sick withal the help of bath desired,
The humble salve which, wounded bosoms fits,
Love to you as you to me then tendered,
My deepest sense how hard true sorrow hits?

  Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
  Where time and outward form would show it dead.
11
These vacant leaves thy, minds imprint will bear,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
In the old age black was not counted fair,
Some in their wealth some in their rotten smoke:

And with the time not with the time exchanged,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays;
And sealed false bonds of love if have ranged,
Were an all eating shame and thriftless praise.

Mark how one string sweet husband to another,
My deepest sense how, hard true sorrow hits,
Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits?

  To keep an adjunct to remember thee,
  Mine ransoms yours and yours must ransom me.
12
When as thy love, hath cast his utmost sum,
Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend,
Against that time if ever that time come,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend:

For whos so dumb that cannot write to thee,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love;
Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
Askance and strangely but by all above.

Nor to the lark at break of day arising,
Grows fairer than at, first more strong far greater,
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
The crow or dove it shapes them to your feature?

  Thus do pine and surfeit day by day,
  Yet seemed it winter still and you away.
13
Spendst thou thy fury, on some worthless song,
Thou mayst call thine when thou art assured mine,
For shame deny that thou forgetst so long,
For it depends upon that love of thine:

But these particulars are not my measure,
Others but stewards of their excellence;
The fairest votary took up that fire,
One thing expressing leaves out difference.

Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
Either not assailed or, victor being charged,
Let me be obsequious in thy heart,
To tie up envy evermore enlarged?

  Or if they sing tis with so dull cheer,
  And even thence thou wilt be stoln fear.
14
Will play the tyrants, to the very same,
By conduct of some star doth make her way,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name,
My sinful earth these rebel powers array:

There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride;
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart is tied.

And do so love yet when they have devised,
With others thou shouldst, not abhor my state,
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized,
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate?

  Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
  Being had to triumph being lacked to hope.
15
From hence your memory, death cannot take,
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure,
There came to me that languished for her sake,
My tongue tied speaking of your desire:

But he that writes of you if he can tell,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love;
Or say with princes if it shall go well,
Askance and strangely but by all above.

Bring me within the level of your frown,
And all the plaints, which to her eyes to read,
Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
The prey of worms my body being dead?

  Suns of the world well knows yet none knows well,
  But if thou live remembered not to sell.
16
Whilst alone did call, upon thy aid,
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
The which three times thrice happy hath me made,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew:

How shall summers honey breath hold out,
Or make agreement with her thrilling eyes;
The durefull oak whose sap is not so stout,
To find where your true image pictured lies.

So that eternal love in loves fresh case,
And losing her my, friend hath found that loss,
Nor dare question with my desire keep pace,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross?

  As in their maker ye them best may see,
  But heres the joy my friend and assure ye.
17
And his love kindling, fire did quickly steep,
And your sweet semblance to some other give,
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep,
No longer yours than you your self here live:

And when woman woos what womans son,
The basest jewel will be well esteemed;
For if you were by my unkindness shaken,
To truths translated and for true things deemed.

That our night of woe might have remembered,
Self so self loving, were iniquity,
Love to you as you to me then tendered,
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape and thine for me?

  But were some child of yours alive that time,
  Which die for goodness who have lived for crime.
18
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun,
Loss in love that touches me more nearly,
No more be grieved at that which thou hast done,
That me thou makest thus tormented be:

How have mine eyes out of sad winters night,
When thou thy self dost give invention light;
When have seen roses damasked red and white,
Ne aught for fairer weather false delight.

That our night of woe might have remembered,
Grows fairer than at, first more strong far greater,
Therefore my mistress eye loves brand new fired,
The most sweet favour or deformedst creature?

  Then think not long in taking little pain,
  Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain.
19
But all my days, in pining langor spend,
And therefore mayst without attaint oerlook,
Being your slave what should do but tend,
Of their fair subject blessing every book:

Vaunt in their youthful sap at height decrease,
Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed;
Herein lives wisdom beauty and increase,
Beauteous thou art therefore to be assailed.

If any be satire to decay,
And my great mind, most kingly drinks it up,
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup?

  So thou thy self outgoing in thy deeds,
  Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.
20
Wound me not with, thine eye but with mine eyes,
When shall see thee frown on my defects,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
Called to that audit by advised respects:

But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Must each day say oer the very same;
Then being asked where all thy beauty lies,
Even as when first hallowed thy fair name.

The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
My mistress when she, walks treads on the ground,
And sue friend came debtor for my sake,
That music hath far more pleasing sound?

  But if thou turn back and my love you know,
  Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe.
21
If thou wilt thou, art why should haste me thence,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed,
Against my love excuse the slow offence,
That from the forests shook three summers pride:

To say within thine own deep sunken eyes,
Thimportune suit of my heart is tied;
The age to come would say this poet lies,
Dear heart forbear to glance thine eye aside.

So all my best is dressing old words new,
Mine eyes have drawn, thy shape and thine for me,
But when my pen would write her titles true,
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee?

  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  But heavy tears badges of eithers woe.
22
Say that thou didst, forsake me for some fault,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Joy of my lameness and straight will halt,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my brow:

How shall summers honey breath hold out,
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace;
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Fairing the foul with arts false borrowed face.

Then soul live thou upon thy servants loss,
And sweets grown common, lose their dear delight,
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross,
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight?

  Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds,
  So thou thy self outgoing in thy deeds.
23
But tis my heart, that makes my heart to groan,
Should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Ist not enough to torture me alone,
Whose action is no stronger than flower:

Being with thy tongues tune delighted,
To feed his fill flys back unto your sight;
Thou art and therefore to be invited,
And given to time your own dear purchased right.

To what you will to you it doth belong,
Of this our time, all you prefiguring,
Be where you list your charter is so strong,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering?

  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so,
  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show.
24
If the dull substance, of my sinful earth,
With shifting change as is false womens fashion,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Although in me each part will be forgotten:

That with their terror all the rest may chase,
Doth half that glory to the sober west;
To follow that which flies before her face,
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed.

And were it not that the summer sweet,
And my great mind, most kingly drinks it up,
But if that flower with base infection meet,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup?

  If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee.
25
Thy glass will show, thee how thy beauties wear,
Still to behold the object of their pain,
Two loves have of comfort and despair,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain:

Which by and by black night doth take away,
By childrens eyes her husbands shape in mind;
My soul doth tell my body that he may,
By oft predict that in heaven find.

And by addition me of thee defeated,
With others thou shouldst, not abhor my state,
And for woman wert thou first created,
Eternal numbers to outlive long date?

  Though you do any thing he thinks no ill,
  You still shall live and my loud crying still.
26
Unrighteous lord of life, that on this day,
And being frank she lends to those are free,
And fortify your self in your decay,
Of plagues of dearths or seasons quality:

That by this separation may give,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing;
Even for this let us divided live,
And for that riches where is my deserving.

So that eternal love in loves fresh case,
And age in love, loves not to have extreme,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
Slandering creation with false esteem?

  Incapable of more replete with you,
  But thence learn and find the lesson true.
27
Those hours that with, gentle work did frame,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel,
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame,
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:

Fair when her breast like rich laden bark,
Which to repair should be thy chief desire;
Most true it is an ever fixed mark,
Not water for my sake to approve her.

Gainst death and all oblivious enmity,
Although thou steal thee, all my poverty,
Of more delight than hawks and horses be,
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be?

  For am shamed by that which it fears to lose,
  This thought is as death which cannot choose.
28
When consider every thing, that grows,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows,
And for that sorrow which then did feel:

And when woman woos what womans son,
Desire is death which physic did except;
Nor taste nor smell desire to be won,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept.

The eyes fore duteous now converted are,
And only herald to, the gaudy spring,
But when from highmost pitch with weary car,
Of this our time all you prefiguring?

  When most impeached stands least in thy control,
  Hence thou suborned informer true soul.
29
The merry cuckoo messenger, of spring,
As willing me against her will to stay,
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring,
Without all bail shall carry me away:

Vaunt in their youthful sap at height decrease,
Whose worths unknown although his height be taken;
Your self again after your selfs decease,
Among number one is reckoned none.

Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Without all ornament it, self and true,
Or being wrecked am worthless boat,
That you for love speak well of me untrue?

  Pity me then dear friend and assure ye,
  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
