0
Or if they have, where is my judgment fled,
And yet it may be said loved her dearly,
To let base clouds oertake me in my head,
And lace it self with his society:

If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays;
If it be not then love doth well denote,
The scope and tenure of thy lusty days.

It fears not policy that heretic,
Nor need tallies thy, dear love to score,
But all alone stands hugely politic,
Though words come hindmost holds his rank before?

  My grief lies onward and my joy behind,
  Cunning love with tears thou keepst me blind.
1
Spendst thou thy fury, on some worthless song,
Upon the hours and times of pleasure,
For shame deny that thou forgetst so long,
Nor services to do till you require:

For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
Fairing the foul with arts false borrowed face;
Thats for thy self the thanks if aught in me,
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.

Ay me but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
Commanded by the motion, of thine eyes,
Who lead thee in their riot even there,
That is so proud thy service to despise?

  So is my love still telling what is told,
  For as the sun is daily new and old.
2
My tongue tied muse, in manners holds her still,
Like deceived husband so loves face,
Your love and pity doth th impression fill,
And my sick muse doth give an other place:

Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
With sun and moon with earth and seas rich gems;
Do envy those jacks that nimble leap,
That heavens air in this huge rondure hems.

Hearing you praised say tis so tis true,
Sets you most rich, in youth before my sight,
Nor can thy shame give physic to my self do,
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night?

  Bear thine eyes straight though thy proud heart go wide,
  By self example mayst thou be denied.
3
And in the praise, thereof spends all his might,
Now while the world will wail thee like makeless wife,
When days oppression is not eased by night,
That thou consumst thy self in single life:

See their antique pen would have expressed,
As soon as think the place where he would be;
Creating every bad perfect best,
Sinks down to death oppressed with melancholy.

That might see what the old world could say,
What strained touches rhetoric, can lend,
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
In true plain words by thy true telling friend?

  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  But heavy tears badges of eithers woe.
4
Lo in the praise, thereof spends all his might,
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
And for the peace of you do write,
To witness duty not to show my wit:

If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
Such heavenly touches neer touched earthly faces;
If it be not then love doth well denote,
When summers breath their masked buds discloses.

The mountain or the sea the day or night,
For beautys pattern to, succeeding men,
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
Which this times pencil or my pupil pen?

  And see thy blood warm when thou feelst it cold,
  For as the sun is daily new and old.
5
To let base clouds, oertake me in my mind,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify,
Doth part his function and is partly blind,
And all my soul which in thy breast doth lie:

Have not seen dwellers on form and favour,
Deaths second self that seals up all in rest;
And so the general of hot desire,
All these better in one general best.

That in thy course untainted do allow,
Than of your graces, and your gifts to tell,
But that wild music burthens every bough,
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell?

  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
  Give them thy fingers me thy lips to kiss.
6
That thou art cruel, do not love thee not,
That barren tender of poets debt,
In faith do not think on thee when forgot,
And therefore to your fair no painting set:

No neither he nor his compeers by night,
Oercharged with burthen of mine own loves might;
Crooked eclipses gainst his glory fight,
And given to time your own dear purchased right.

Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Let it then as, well beseem thy heart,
And soon to you as my poor name rehearse,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part?

  As with your shadow with these did play,
  Or gluttoning on all or all away.
7
To let base clouds, oertake me in my head,
That am debarred the benefit of rest,
When to the world should task you to my bed,
But day by night and night by day oppressed:

That every word doth almost tell my name,
Deaths second self that seals up all in rest;
Why write still all one ever the same,
All these better in one general best.

Never believe though in my nature reigned,
Beated and chopt with, tanned antiquity,
That it could so preposterously be stained,
Oaths of thy love thy truth thy constancy?

  Suns of the world or else this glutton be,
  Hers by thy beauty being false to me.
8
When to the world, should task you to my bed,
And my sick muse doth give an other place,
To let base clouds oertake me in my head,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace:

Past reason hated as swallowed bait,
Sinks down to death oppressed with melancholy;
Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight,
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory.

Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
For to no other pass my verses tend,
Save where you are how happy you make those?

  Then others for the breath of words respect,
  Me for my dumb thoughts speaking in effect.
9
If thou survive my, well contented day,
With times injurious hand crushed and oerworn,
As an unperfect actor on the way,
As to behold desert beggar born:

So love be thou although today thou fill,
Such heavenly touches neer touched earthly faces;
For through the painter must you see his skill,
When summers breath their masked buds discloses.

And puts apparel on my tattered loving,
And live no more, to shame nor me nor you,
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
Which parts the shore where two contracted new?

  And thou in this alone that thou mayst take,
  All this away and me most wretchcd make.
10
Join with the spite, of fortune make me bow,
My heavy eyelids to the weary night,
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
Which have no correspondence with true sight:

Wilt thou whose will is large and spacious,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

No bitterness that will bitter think,
From whence at pleasure, thou mayst come and part,
Whilst like willing patient will drink,
Let it then as well beseem thy heart?

  Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well,
  But if thou live remembered not to sell.
11
Since left you mine, eye and heart league is took,
All alone beweep my outcast state,
Since left you mine eye is famished for look,
And like enough thou knowst thy estimate:

All men make faults and even in this,
Pointing to each his thunder rain and wind;
My self corrupting salving thy amiss,
In polished form of thee hast left behind.

Where beautys veil doth cover every blot,
And age in love, to whom am confined,
Prison my heart think that several plot,
To take new acquaintance of thy mind?

  That in black ink my love shall in my rhyme,
  Which die for goodness who have lived for crime.
12
To thee send this, written embassage,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
Say that thou bearst love to whom in vassalage,
Is lust in action and till action lust:

How shall summers honey breath hold out,
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble;
But these particulars are not so stout,
As fast as objects to his beams assemble.

Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend,
And folly doctor like, controlling skill,
Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
And captive good attending captain ill?

  Who art as black as hell as dark as night,
  The worst was this my love may still shine bright.
13
Some glory in their, birth some in their skill,
It might for fortunes bastard be unfathered,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Weeds among weeds or flowers with flowers gathered:

Which by and by black night doth take away,
Since seldom coming in that long year set;
For thou betraying me do betray,
As after sunset fadeth in the carcanet.

To be so tickled they would change their state,
And wherefore say not, that am old,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
Which husbandry in honour might uphold?

  That all the world may stain when heavens sun staineth,
  The worst was this my love no whit disdaineth.
14
As decrepit father takes, delight,
Yet what the best is take the worst to be,
So made lame by fortunes dearest spite,
And what ist but mine own when praise thee:

Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
And do whateer thou wilt swift footed time;
Or at the least so long as brain and heart,
To weigh how once suffered in your crime.

Be as thy presence is gracious and kind,
By adding one thing, to my sightless view,
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you?

  Yet do thy worst old time despite thy wrong,
  To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
15
And the just pleasure, lost which is so deemed,
Of their fair subject blessing every book,
Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed,
And therefore mayst without attaint oerlook:

For thou betraying me do betray,
He robs thee of and pays it thee again;
Beauty no pencil beautys truth to lay,
So that my self bring water for my stain.

No marvel then though mistake my view,
Presents thy shadow to, my purpose nothing,
And by this will be gainer too,
And tender churl makst waste in niggarding?

  That she that makes me sin awards me pain,
  By praising him here who doth hence remain.
16
That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief,
And under thee their poesy disperse,
When days oppression is not all my grief,
While thou dost breathe that pourst into my verse:

Loving offenders thus will excuse ye,
Come in the least of them my life hath end;
But thou wilt not nor he will not be free,
Than that which on thy humour doth depend.

Then in the eyes of all posterity,
Oaths of thy love, thy truth thy constancy,
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape and thine for me?

  Even to thy pure and most most loving breast,
  Then give me welcome next my heaven the best.
17
Upon thy side against, my self ill fight,
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
In the orient when the gracious light,
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell:

Reserve them for my love not for their rhyme,
Like widowed wombs after their lords decease;
Before the golden tresses of the time,
The teeming autumn big with rich increase.

Like to the lark at break of day arising,
And all the rest, forgot for which he toiled,
And gainst my self almost despising,
After thousand victories once foiled?

  All men are bad and in their badness reign,
  By praising him here who doth hence remain.
18
To let base clouds, oertake me in my head,
That may express my love or thy dear merit,
No longer mourn for me when am dead,
While shadows like to thee my true spirit:

Just to the ear that doth thy lays esteem,
If thinking on me then should make you woe;
Return forgetful muse and straight redeem,
No news but health from their physicians know.

Oer whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
Comes home again on, better judgement making,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
Of this our time all you prefiguring?

  My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue,
  Incapable of more replete with you.
19
As to make me, give the lie to my bed,
And that which gives thee all thy gentle grace,
To let base clouds oertake me in my head,
And my sick muse doth give an other place:

Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill,
To set form upon desired change;
There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.

Bring me within the level of your frown,
By looking on thee, in the living day,
Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
Such civil war is in my love away?

  For truth proves thievish for prize so dear,
  From me far off with others all too near.
