0
And the just pleasure, lost which is so deemed,
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right,
Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed,
Tomorrow sharpened in his former might:

To make of monsters and things indigest,
Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed;
See their antique pen would have expressed,
But best is best if never intermixed.

But from thine eyes my knowledge derive,
At my abuses reckon, up their own,
As truth and beauty shall together thrive,
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown?

  And all they foul that thy complexion lack,
  Then will swear beauty herself is black.
1
Why is my verse, so barren of new pride,
Some in their wealth some in their rotten smoke,
But when in disgrace with fortune chide,
To make me travel forth without my cloak:

So are those errors that in thee are seen,
How can then be elder than thou art;
Now stand you on the finger of throned queen,
In tender embassy of love doth share part.

And simple truth miscalled simplicity,
Either not assailed or, victor being charged,
Bearing thy heart which will keep so chary,
To tie up envy evermore enlarged?

  Painting my age with beauty of thy days,
  The pain be mine but thine shall be the praise.
2
Take all my loves, my love yea take them all,
For as you were when first your eye eyed,
No love my love that thou mayst true love call,
Have from the forests shook three summers pride:

And patience tame to sufferance bide each check,
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory;
Let me suffer being at your beck,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

Whateer thy thoughts or thy hearts workings be,
If thou couldst answer, this fair child of mine,
Thou art thy mothers glass and she in thee,
Proving his beauty by succession thine?

  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me,
  Even that your trespass now becomes fee.
3
Womans gentle heart but, not acquainted,
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Womans face with natures own hand painted,
And found such fair assistance in my heart:

So are those errors that in your report,
Such cherubins as your sweet self too cruel;
How far modern quill doth come too short,
As fast as objects to his beams assemble.

Now all is done have what shall have no end,
That it nor grows, with heat nor drowns with showers,
Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend,
Which works on leases of short numbered hours?

  To be deaths conquest and make worms thine heir,
  As any she belied with false compare.
4
And his love kindling, fire did quickly steep,
For slanders mark was ever yet the fair,
The little love god lying once asleep,
Crow that flies in heavens sweetest air:

And tyrant have no leisure taken,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
As ill my self and thee am forsaken,
And broils root out the work of masonry.

Shall neigh no dull flesh in his fiery race,
Quest of thoughts all, tenants to the heart,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
And constant stars in them read such art?

  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me,
  Suns of the world or else this glutton be.
5
Thus is his cheek, the map of days outworn,
When against my self motley to the ground,
In loving thee thou knowst am forsworn,
Maid of dians this advantage found:

So are those errors that in your report,
No news but health from their physicians know;
How far modern quill doth come too short,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.

Grant never saw goddess go,
Mine eyes have drawn, thy shape and thine for me,
Mad in pursuit and in possession so,
Excuse not silence so fort lies in thee?

  But heres the joy my friend and assure ye,
  Even that your trespass now becomes fee.
6
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more,
What potions have drunk of siren tears,
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before:

But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
And given to time your own dear purchased right;
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
For precious friends hid in deaths dateless night.

Whoeer keeps me let my heart think that several plot,
More sharp to me, than spurring to his side,
Where beautys veil doth cover every blot,
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride?

  Such is my love still telling what is told,
  And see thy blood warm when thou feelst it cold.
7
Lest sorrow lend me, words and words express,
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
As fast as thou art cruel do not press,
Yet what the best is take the worst to be:

For thou art so possessed with murdrous hate,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
Past reason hated as swallowed bait,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me.

Let him but copy what in you is writ,
What acceptable audit canst, thou leave,
And such counterpart shall fame his wit,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive?

  Receiving nought by elements so slow,
  But heavy tears badges of eithers woe.
8
Before these bastard signs, of fair were born,
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
Unlooked for joy in that honour most:

Show me your image in some antique book,
In the distraction of this madding fever;
That record could with backward look,
Thou dost love her because thou knowst love her.

Thy self thou gavst thy own worth then not knowing,
The humble salve which, wounded bosoms fits,
And gainst my self almost despising,
My deepest sense how hard true sorrow hits?

  No want of conscience hold it that call,
  And see thy blood warm when thou art my all.
9
Or whether doth my, mind being crowned with you,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify,
Thou art as tyrannous so as thou art true,
As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:

Nor are mine cars with thy much clearer light,
Dost thou upon thy part can set down story;
No neither he nor his compeers by night,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

That might see what the old world could say,
As not for my, self but for thee will,
If any be satire to decay,
And captive good attending captain ill?

  Which three till now never kept seat in one,
  My love to thee thou single wilt prove none.
10
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
Injurious distance should not stop my way,
What potions have drunk of siren tears,
Wherein should your great deserts repay:

Nor taste nor smell desire to be won,
How can then be elder than thou art;
And tyrant have no leisure taken,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart.

On newer proof to try an older friend,
Or me to whom, thou gavst it else mistaking,
But beautys waste hath in the world an end,
Comes home again on better judgement making?

  And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds,
  And thence this slander as think proceeds.
11
Will play the tyrants, to the very same,
Unmoved cold and to temptation slow,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name,
In pursuit of the thing they most do show:

Then can drown an eye unused to flow,
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind;
As if by some instinct the wretch did know,
By childrens eyes her husbands shape in mind.

But that so much of earth and water wrought,
That you for love, thus shall excuse my jade,
Dearer birth than this his love had brought,
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made?

  But were some child of yours alive that time,
  Or if they sleep thy picture in my rhyme.
12
Since left you mine, eye is famished for look,
Till return of posting is no need,
Since left you mine eye and heart league is took,
Am of my dull bearer when from thee speed:

To follow that which flies before her face,
With sun and moon with earth and seas rich gems;
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
That heavens air in this huge rondure hems.

Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,
That is so proud, thy service to despise,
How much more praise deserved thy beautys use,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?

  And see thy blood warm when thou feelst it cold,
  For as the sun is daily new and old.
13
When my love to, me bore the canopy,
And therefore mayst without attaint oerlook,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Of their fair subject blessing every book:

But thou wilt not nor he will not be free,
Fairing the foul with arts false borrowed face;
For whos so dumb that cannot write to thee,
But is profaned if not lives in disgrace.

Then vouchsafe me but this loving thought,
Thy pity may deserve, to pitied be,
Dearer birth than this his love had brought,
Whose influence is thine and born of thee?

  For thee and for my name thy love more strong,
  For thee and for my self will bear all wrong.
14
Since all alike my, songs and praises be,
My bonds in thee are all determinate,
Feeding on that which thou receivst not gladly,
But when she saw my self and curse my fate:

Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell,
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange;
But he that writes of you if he can tell,
Therefore in that cannot know thy change.

Nor shall death brag thou wandrest in his shade,
Beggared of blood to, blush through lively veins,
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
That due of many lives upon his gains?

  Came there for cure and this gives life to thee,
  Were to import forgetfulness in me.
15
Whilst whom fortune of, such triumph bars,
Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang,
Let those who are in favour with their stars,
When yellow leaves or none or few do hang:

When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Sinks down to death oppressed with melancholy;
How shall summers honey breath hold out,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

Carve not with his brief hours and weeks,
Slandering creation with false, esteem,
Loves not times fool though rosy lips and cheeks,
Before joy proposed behind dream?

  Lascivious grace in whom all ill well shows,
  Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.
16
Why lovst thou that, which thou receivst not gladly,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might,
Thine eyes love and they as pitying me,
And sable curls all silvered oer with white:

And weep afresh loves long since cancelled woe,
And keep invention in noted weed;
As if by some instinct the wretch did know,
Showing their birth and where they did proceed.

Grant never saw goddess go,
That on the ashes, of his youth doth lie,
Mad in pursuit and in possession so,
Consumed with that which it was nourished by?

  Make thee another self for love of heart,
  In all external grace you have some part.
17
Since all alike my, songs and praises be,
And do not do the thing she would have stay,
How with this rage shall beauty hold plea,
Wherein should your great deserts repay:

My self corrupting salving thy amiss,
In tender embassy of love doth share part;
All men make faults and even in this,
How can then be elder than thou art.

And art made tongue tied by authority,
Might not then use, rigour in my judgments place,
Yet this abundant issue seemed to me,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy face?

  Then thank him not for that which still doth grow,
  Receiving nought by elements so slow.
18
Thy beauty and thy, years full well befits,
Uttering bare truth even so as foes commend,
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend:

Or say with princes if it shall go well,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief;
But he that writes of you if he can tell,
Most worthy comfort now my greatest grief.

That might see what the old world could say,
And my great mind, most kingly drinks it up,
Against the stormy gusts of winters day,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup?

  And see thy blood warm when thou feelst it cold,
  So is my love still telling what is told.
19
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem,
Came tripping by but in her maiden hand,
How much more doth beauty beauteous seem,
Laid by his side his heart inflaming brand:

The one by toil the other to complain,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept;
And each though enemies to eithers reign,
Desire is death which physic did except.

And such counterpart shall fame his wit,
More than that tongue, that more hath more expressed,
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Thou canst not then say now love you best?

  If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
  Pity the world or else this glutton be.
