0
How sweet and lovely, dost thou make the shame,
Breathed forth the sound that said hate,
Is perjured murdrous bloody full of blame,
And look upon my self and curse my fate:

Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned,
Showing their birth and where they did proceed;
Three april perfumes in three hot junes burned,
And keep invention in noted weed.

Though love what others do abhor,
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
Look whom she best endowed she gave thee more,
While he insults oer dull and speechless tribes?

  No love toward others in that bosom sits,
  That on himself such murdrous shame commits.
1
Was it the proud, full sail of his great verse,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Is lust in action and till action lust:

But thou wilt not nor he will not be free,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine;
Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
That in my will no fair acceptance shine.

To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
Mad slanderers by mad, ears believed be,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
Excuse not silence so fort lies in thee?

  Cunning love with tears thou keepst me blind,
  My grief lies onward and my joy behind.
2
Whats in the brain, that ink may character,
Thy merit hath my added praise beside,
The first my thought the other my desire,
And my self with thee wherever abide:

Was it his spirit by spirits taught to write,
But those same tongues that give thee memory;
No neither he nor his compeers by night,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

What happy title do find,
The most sweet favour, or deformedst creature,
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
The crow or dove it shapes them to your feature?

  To keep an adjunct to remember thee,
  But if thou live remembered not to be.
3
Love is merchandized whose, rich esteeming,
Some in their wealth some in their bodys force,
The charter of thy worth with manners may sing,
Some in their hawks and hounds some in their horse:

Then beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse,
Dost thou upon thy part can set down story;
Then beauteous niggard why dost thou use,
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory.

Bearing thy heart which will keep so chary,
Let it then as, well beseem thy heart,
Yet this abundant issue seemed to me,
The clear eyes moiety and the dear hearts part?

  To be beloved of thee will not seem so,
  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show.
4
Whilst many nymphs that, vowed chaste life to keep,
Full charactered with lasting memory,
The little love god lying once asleep,
Upon thy self thy beautys legacy:

Just to the ear that doth thy lays esteem,
He robs thee of and pays it thee again;
Return forgetful muse and straight redeem,
So that my self bring water for my stain.

Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
From sullen earth sings, hymns at heavens gate,
They were but sweet but figures of delight,
Such civil war is in my love and hate?

  So long lives this and dwell in lovers eyes,
  So till the judgment that your self arise.
5
Forgot upon your dearest, love to call,
Thou makst faults graces that to thee resort,
Take all my loves my love yea take them all,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport:

Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
Which to repair should be thy chief desire;
What excuse will my poor beast then find,
Thy self thou stickst not to conspire.

If any be satire to decay,
As his triumphant prize, proud of this pride,
That might see what the old world could say,
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride?

  That on himself such murdrous shame commits,
  No love toward others in that bosom sits.
6
That god forbid that, made me first your slave,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain,
Or at your hand th account of hours to crave,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain:

And therefore art enforced to seek anew,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace;
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
To dry the rain on my storm beaten face.

But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
As not for my, sake lay on me this cross,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
And losing her my friend hath found that loss?

  Think all but one and me in that bosom sits,
  That on himself such murdrous shame commits.
7
Clouds and eclipses stain, both moon and sun,
Whose strengths abundance weakens his own heart,
And will thy image should keep open,
Who with his fear is put beside his part:

Nor are mine cars with thy tongues tune delighted,
Like widowed wombs after their lords decease;
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted,
The teeming autumn big with rich increase.

Which is not mixed with seconds knows no art,
And haply of our, old acquaintance tell,
Let me be obsequious in thy heart,
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell?

  When tyrants crests and tombs of brass are spent,
  So return rebuked to my content.
8
As decrepit father takes, delight,
My heart mine eye the freedom of that ground,
Lo in the praise thereof spends all his might,
Maid of dians this advantage found:

Then beauteous niggard why dost thou use,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
Then beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse,
Dost thou upon thy part can set down story.

Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
That on the ashes, of his youth doth lie,
Look whom she best endowed she gave thee more,
The sun it self it only live and die?

  To eat the worlds due by the grave and thee,
  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see.
9
Then let not my, love to whom in vassalage,
As twixt miser and his wealth is found,
To thee send this written embassage,
My heart mine eye the freedom of that ground:

Most true it is an ever fixed mark,
Others but stewards of their excellence;
It is the star to every wandring bark,
One thing expressing leaves out difference.

The other as your bounty doth appear,
One will of mine, to make thy large will more,
Speak of the spring and foison of the year,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store?

  When most impeached stands least in thy control,
  Hence thou suborned informer true soul.
10
Tis better to be, vile than vile esteemed,
From limits far remote where thou dost stay,
And the just pleasure lost which is so deemed,
One of her feathered creatures broke away:

Then should spur though mounted on the wind,
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange;
And for my love today tomorrow kind,
To set form upon desired change.

At such who not born fair no beauty lack,
Which for their habitation, chose out thee,
Therefore my mistress eyes are raven black,
Doing thee vantage double vantage me?

  Lascivious grace in whom all ill deeds,
  Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.
11
Whilst many nymphs that, vowed chaste life to keep,
Loss in love with sighs himself doth smother,
Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep,
Then look death my bones with dust shall cover:

Then being asked where all thy beauty lies,
How can then be elder than thou art;
To say within thine own deep sunken eyes,
In tender embassy of love doth share part.

But that is in my thought whose love to you,
The region cloud hath, masked him from me now,
Hearing you praised say tis so tis true,
And delves the parallels in beautys brow?

  You still shall live such virtue hath my pen,
  So shall thou feed on death that feeds on men.
12
If thou survive my, well contented day,
Beyond all date even to eternity,
And shalt by fortune once more resurvey,
That they behold and see not what they see:

The world will be thy widow and still weep,
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory;
Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
And wear their brave state out of memory.

Of more delight than hawks and horses be,
When other petty griefs, have done their spite,
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night?

  Lo thus by day my limbs by night my mind,
  Cunning love with tears thou keepst me blind.
13
So made lame by, fortunes dearest spite,
And do not do the thing she would have stay,
Doth homage to his new appearing sight,
One of her feathered creatures broke away:

Thence comes it that my name receives brand,
To hideous winter and confounds him there;
No matter then although my foot did stand,
Beauty oer snowed and bareness every where.

Or mine eyes seeing this say this is not,
And age in love, loves not to have extreme,
Prison my heart think that several plot,
And am still with them and they mourners seem?

  Praising thy worth despite his cruel hand,
  And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand.
14
My tongue tied muse, in manners holds her still,
Can bring him to his sweet up locked treasure,
Whoever hath her wish thou hast thy will,
But sad mortality oersways their power:

Are vanishing or vanished out of sight,
Loves eye is not so true as all mens no;
No neither he nor his compeers by night,
No news but health from their physicians know.

Let him but copy what in you is writ,
And to his palate, doth prepare the cup,
And such counterpart shall fame his wit,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up?

  His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
  You still shall live and he in them still green.
15
Let those who are, in favour with their stars,
To witness duty not to show my wit,
Whilst whom fortune of such triumph bars,
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit:

For through the painter must you see his skill,
As fast as objects to his beams assemble;
So love be thou although today thou fill,
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble.

Making no summer of anothers green,
Made more or less, by thy true telling friend,
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
What strained touches rhetoric can lend?

  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
  Mine be thy love and thy loves use their treasure.
16
What can mine own, praise to mine eyes best see,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay,
Have put on black and loving mourners be,
Without all bail shall carry me away:

Are vanishing or vanished out of sight,
Than think that we before have heard them told;
Then thou whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
What thou dost foist upon us that is old.

As victors of my breast where through the sun,
They live unwooed and, unrespected fade,
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done,
That you for love thus shall excuse my jade?

  Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
  Or gluttoning on all or all away.
17
As to prevent our, maladies unseen,
For they in thee thousand errors note,
Full many glorious morning have seen,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote:

Duty so great which wit so poor as mine,
It suffers not in smiling pomp nor falls;
Me from my self mine own worth do define,
Whereto th inviting time our fashion calls.

Let me be obsequious in thy heart,
But bears it out, even to the heart,
Which is not mixed with seconds knows no art,
The clear eyes moiety and the dear hearts part?

  To leave poor me thou hast both him and me,
  Came there for cure and this shall ever be.
18
Womans gentle heart but, not acquainted,
Is lust in action and till action lust,
But tis my heart that loves own hand painted,
From hands of falsehood in sure wards of trust:

To win me soon to hell my female evil,
Even as when first hallowed thy fair name;
And would corrupt my saint to be devil,
Must each day say oer the very same.

Love to you as you to me then tendered,
Though to it self, it only live and die,
Sick withal the help of bath desired,
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie?

  To be beloved of thee will not seem so,
  Receiving nought by elements so slow.
19
Gored mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day,
For well thou knowst to my true love control,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay:

Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from loves delight;
For never resting time leads summer on,
That gainst thy self dost give invention light.

Nor did wonder at the lilys white,
Three themes in one, one pleasing note do sing,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
Comes home again on better judgement making?

  That then scorn to change my state with kings,
  If thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings.
