0
To let base clouds, oertake me in my way,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might,
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
And sable curls all silvered oer with white:

That use is not forbidden usury,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;
Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
Is poorly imitated after you.

What happy title do find,
What strained touches rhetoric, can lend,
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Made more or less by thy true telling friend?

  As he takes from you engraft you new,
  But thence learn and find the lesson true.
1
Doth homage to his, new appearing sight,
Now while the world unbless some mother,
After my death dear love forget me quite,
Then look death my bones with dust shall cover:

Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
He robs thee of and pays it thee again;
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
So that my self bring water for my stain.

At such who not born fair no beauty lack,
While he insults oer, dull and speechless tribes,
Therefore my mistress eyes are raven black,
My love looks fresh and death to me subscribes?

  Drugs poison him that so feil sick of you,
  Hate from hate away she threw.
2
If the dull substance, of my wailing chief,
And lace it self with his society,
When days oppression is not all my grief,
Beyond all date even to eternity:

What excuse will my poor beast then find,
Is poorly imitated after you;
And for my love today tomorrow kind,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew.

Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
To play the watchman, ever for thy sake,
So should the lines of life that life repair,
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake?

  To eat the worlds due by the grave and thee,
  Mine ransoms yours and yours must ransom me.
3
And trouble deaf heaven, with my bootless cries,
And your sweet semblance to some other give,
When in disgrace with fortune and mens eyes,
No longer yours than you your self here live:

The beast that bears me tired with my woe,
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed;
Give not windy night rainy morrow,
All these better in one general best.

But at my mistress eye loves brand new fired,
And make times spoils, despised everywhere,
Sick withal the help of bath desired,
As those gold candles fixed in heavens air?

  Painting my age with beauty of thy days,
  The pain be mine but thine shall be the praise.
4
The dedicated words which, writers use,
Sweets with sweets war not joy delights in joy,
So is it not with me as with that muse,
Or else receivst with pleasure thine annoy:

Loving offenders thus will excuse ye,
When was wont to greet it with my lays;
For whos so dumb that cannot write to thee,
Against the wrackful siege of battring days.

But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
That is so vexed, with watching and with tears,
Him in thy creation did decree,
The sun it self sees not till heaven clears?

  But since she pricked thee out for womens pleasure,
  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer.
5
All tongues the voice, of souls give thee that due,
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
Those parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view,
Savage extreme rude cruel not to be:

The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the sun;
These blenches gave my heart hath scaped this sorrow,
That looks on tempests and is never shaken.

Look what thy memory cannot contain,
Beated and chopt with, tanned antiquity,
Those children nursed delivered from thy brain,
Thou of thy love thy truth thy constancy?

  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so,
  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show.
6
Poor soul the centre, of my love depends,
Of their fair subject blessing every book,
Then let not my love shall be thy amends,
And therefore mayst without attaint oerlook:

To follow that which flies before her face,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee.

So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Thy pity may deserve, to pitied be,
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
By those swift messengers returned from thee?

  Or gluttoning on all or all away,
  Thus do pine and surfeit day by day.
7
Cupid laid by his, brand and fell asleep,
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
And his love kindling fire did quickly steep,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant time:

In other accents do this praise confound,
That gainst thy self thou stickst not to conspire;
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned,
Thou dost love her because thou knowst love her.

Th offenders sorrow lends but weak relief,
Beggared of blood to, blush through lively veins,
Do forgive thy robbery gentle thief,
That due of many lives upon his gains?

  Pity the world or else this glutton be,
  And my hearts right thy inward love of me.
8
And the just pleasure, lost which is so deemed,
That am debarred the benefit of rest,
Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed,
But day by night and night by day oppressed:

Nor taste nor smell desire to be won,
Is poorly imitated after you;
And when woman woos what womans son,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew.

When all my best doth worship thy defect,
What acceptable audit canst, thou leave,
But when my glass shows me my self respect,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive?

  Makes summers welcome thrice more wished more rare,
  Be not self willed for thou art much too fair.
9
That time of year, thou mayst in me behold,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me,
Such seems your beauty still three winters cold,
And lace it self with his society:

That use is not forbidden usury,
And in my mind thy worst all best exceeds;
Loving offenders thus will excuse ye,
To kiss the tender inward of thy deeds.

Carve not with his brief hours and weeks,
Mine eyes have drawn, thy shape and thine for me,
Loves not times fool though rosy lips and cheeks,
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee?

  And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds,
  And thence this slander as think proceeds.
10
To me fair friend, you never can be old,
Whose strengths abundance weakens his own heart,
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Who with his fear is put beside his part:

The one by toil the other to complain,
Than think that we before have heard them told;
And the firm soil win of the watery main,
What thou dost foist upon us that is old.

The other as your bounty doth appear,
More than that tongue, that more hath more expressed,
Speak of the spring and foison of the year,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast?

  Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes,
  And they are rich and ransom all ill well shows.
11
In the orient when, the gracious light,
Upon the hours and times of pleasure,
And for the peace of you do write,
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure:

Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
Upon thy part can set down story;
Me from my self mine own worth do define,
In tender embassy of love to thee.

But that is in my thought whose love to you,
Self so self loving, were iniquity,
Hearing you praised say tis so tis true,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty?

  Save breed to brave him when he takes thee hence,
  And nothing gainst times scythe can make defence.
12
Poor soul the centre, of my flesh were thought,
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age,
That thou art beloved of many thing sought,
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage:

Then thou whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
And time that gave doth now his gift confound;
Was it his spirit by spirits taught to write,
Crawls to maturity wherewith being crowned.

The sea the day to please him thou art bright,
Save where thou art, forced to break twofold truth,
Save that my souls imaginary sight,
And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth?

  As any she belied with false compare,
  Yet seemed it winter which being full of care.
13
Upon those boughs which, shake against the cold,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight,
That time of year thou mayst in me behold,
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite:

Nativity once in the main of light,
And threescore year would make the taker mad;
Crooked eclipses gainst his glory fight,
Past reason hunted and no sooner had.

The eyes fore duteous now converted are,
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
But when from highmost pitch with weary car,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose?

  Painting my age with beauty of thy days,
  The pain be mine but thine shall be the praise.
14
Whilst many nymphs that, vowed chaste life to keep,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep,
Is lust in action and till action lust:

No neither he nor his compeers by night,
All these better in one general best;
Tell me thou lovst elsewhere but in my sight,
Doth half that glory to the sober west.

And your true rights be termed poets rage,
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
Why should my papers yellowed with their age,
Save where you are how happy you make those?

  Give my love fame faster than time wastes life,
  So thou preventst his scythe and crooked knife.
15
Some glory in their, birth some in their skill,
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste,
Whoever hath her wish thou hast thy will,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste:

Past reason hated as swallowed bait,
Than that which on thy humour doth depend;
For thou art so possessed with murdrous hate,
Come in the least of them my life hath end.

Thy registers and thee both defy,
And die as fast, as they see others grow,
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
The one doth shadow of your beauty show?

  The worth of that is that which still doth grow,
  To be beloved of thee will not seem so.
16
Who will believe my verse in time to come,
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds:

See their antique pen would have expressed,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
Creating every bad perfect best,
How can then be elder than thou art.

Grant never saw goddess go,
Grows fairer than at, first more strong far greater,
Bliss in proof and proved very woe,
The crow or dove it shapes them to your feature?

  Her love for whose dear love rise and fall,
  No want of conscience hold it that call.
17
Is perjured murdrous bloody, full of blame,
And for that which longer nurseth the disease,
Will play the tyrants to the very same,
Th uncertain sickly appetite to please:

Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
To truths translated and for true things deemed;
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek,
The basest jewel will be well esteemed.

Dearer birth than this his love had brought,
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing,
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
Or me to whom thou gavst it else mistaking?

  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me,
  Die single and thine image dies with thee.
18
Is perjured murdrous bloody, full of blame,
Not by our feeling but by others seeing,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name,
When not to be receives reproach of being:

Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell,
By oft predict that in heaven find;
Could make me any summers story tell,
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind.

Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
Thy pity may deserve, to pitied be,
To be so tickled they would change their state,
Self so self loving were iniquity?

  Thy end is truths and beautys doom and date,
  For thee against my self ill vow debate.
19
With thy sweet fingers, when thou gently swayst,
My tongue tied patience with too much disdain,
How oft when thou my music music playst,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain:

Then beauteous niggard why dost thou use,
Triumph in love flesh stays no farther reason;
Then beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse,
My nobler part to my gross bodys treason.

The statute of thy beauty do question make,
To thy self thy, sweet beloved name no more,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake,
More sharp to me than spurring to his store?

  For thee and for my name thy love more strong,
  Yet do thy worst old time despite thy wrong.
