0
In act thy bed, vow broke and new faith torn,
And lace it self with his fair doth rehearse,
In loving thee thou knowst am forsworn,
And under thee their poesy disperse:

When lofty trees see barren of leaves,
Others but stewards of their excellence;
And summers green all girded up in sheaves,
One thing expressing leaves out difference.

Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
How much more praise deserved thy beautys use,
While he insults oer dull and speechless tribes?

  Even that your trespass now becomes fee,
  Mine ransoms yours and yours must ransom me.
1
But when in disgrace, with fortune chide,
Some in their wealth some in their rotten smoke,
That did not better for my life provide,
And make me travel forth without my cloak:

In me thou seest the twilight of such day,
Closet never pierced with crystal eyes;
Which by and by black night doth take away,
To find where your true image pictured lies.

But for their virtue only is their show,
Can make you live, your self in eyes of men,
Mad in pursuit and in possession so,
Which this times pencil or my pupil pen?

  Incapable of more replete with you,
  But thence learn and find the lesson true.
2
Poor soul the centre, of my wailing chief,
And place my merit in the fragrant rose,
When days oppression is not all my grief,
In what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose:

Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
Naming thy name blesses an ill report;
For since each hand hath put on natures power,
Making lascivious comments on thy sport.

Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
So all their parts of me to thee did give,
Save where you are how happy you make those?

  And see thy blood warm when thou feelst it cold,
  Such is my love still telling what is told.
3
The first my thought, the other my desire,
Some in their hawks and hounds some in their horse,
Lo in the brain that ink may character,
Some in their hawks and hounds some in their bodys force:

Then beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;
Then beauteous niggard why dost thou use,
When you have bid your servant once adieu.

Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
For bending all my, loving thoughts on thee,
Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend,
Doing thee vantage double vantage me?

  Then do thy worst old time despite thy wrong,
  So is my love to thee so belong.
4
The charter of thy, worth gives thee releasing,
My heart mine eye the freedom of that ground,
Hath put spirit of youth in every thing,
Maid of dians this advantage found:

Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Of thee thy record never can be missed;
To follow that which flies before her face,
Have faculty by nature to subsist.

And by this will be gainer too,
As not for my, sake lay on me this cross,
No marvel then though mistake my view,
And losing her my friend hath found that loss?

  And they shall live such virtue hath my pen,
  So shall thou feed on death that feeds on men.
5
Then let not winters, ragged hand deface,
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
Make sweet some vial treasure thou some place,
Which should example where your equal grew:

Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
Which steals mens eyes and womens souls amazeth;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth.

And ruined love when it is greater grief,
Nor double penance to, correct correction,
Do forgive thy robbery gentle thief,
Potions of eisel gainst my strong infection?

  To hear with eyes belongs to loves fine wit,
  Your own glass shows you when you look in it.
6
Why dost thou pine, within and suffer dearth,
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give,
Poor soul the centre of my sinful earth,
And for that sweet odour which doth in it live:

You are my all the world and must strive,
If thinking on me then and wish were renewed;
See better state to me nor to none alive,
And almost thence my nature is subdued.

Hearing you praised say tis so tis true,
Let it then as, well beseem thy heart,
So all my best is dressing old words new,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part?

  And all that is that which it fears to lose,
  This thought is as death which cannot choose.
7
All tongues the voice, of souls give thee that due,
Uttering bare truth even so as foes commend,
Thou art as tyrannous so as thou art true,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend:

An eye more bright than theirs less false in rolling,
Most worthy comfort now my greatest grief;
Nor that full star that ushers in the spring,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.

But in the eyes of all posterity,
And on just proof, surmise accumulate,
To what you will to you as you to me,
Eternal numbers to outlive long date?

  And see thy blood warm when thou art my all,
  Her love for whose dear love rise and fall.
8
These vacant leaves thy, minds imprint will bear,
That they behold and see not what they see,
In the old age black was not counted fair,
And made my self with his society:

As interest of the watery main,
At the woods boldness by thee blushing stand;
The one by toil the other to complain,
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand.

Th offenders sorrow lends but weak relief,
Leaving thee living in, posterity,
And ruined love when it is greater grief,
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape and thine for me?

  Who art as black as hell as dark as night,
  Or if they sleep thy picture in my sight.
9
Let me confess that, we two must be twain,
From thee the pleasure of the fairest wights,
Thy gift thy tables are within my brain,
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights:

Which in thy breast doth live as thine in me,
Since mind at first in character was done;
For whos so dumb that cannot write to thee,
Triumph in love flesh stays no farther reason.

And tongues to be sure that is not false swear,
And constant stars in, them read such art,
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
Quest of thoughts all tenants to the heart?

  Drugs poison him that so feil sick of you,
  My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.
10
Rough winds do shake, the darling buds of may,
Of their fair subject blessing every book,
If thou survive my well contented day,
And therefore mayst without attaint oerlook:

Could make me any summers story tell,
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure;
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell,
What means the world may see my pleasure.

This silence for my sin you did impute,
Despite of wrinkles this, thy golden time,
For impair not beauty being mute,
Thy self to pardon of selfdoing crime?

  Bear thine eyes straight though thy proud heart go wide,
  That may not be so nor thou belied.
11
Some in their garments, though new fangled ill,
Have from the forests shook three summers pride,
Some glory in their birth some in their skill,
For as you were when first your eye eyed:

Why should others false adulterate eyes,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
How can then be elder than thou art.

Look whom she best endowed she gave thee more,
Mine eyes have drawn, thy shape and thine for me,
Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
Excuse not silence so fort lies in thee?

  And all in war with time for love of you,
  Hate from hate away she threw.
12
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
While shadows like to thee my true spirit,
But now my gracious numbers are decayed,
Thus far for love my love or thy dear merit:

And in some perfumes is there more delight,
But forbid thee one most heinous crime;
That over goes my blunt invention quite,
And thou presentst pure unstained prime.

Whilst like willing patient will drink,
That music hath far, more pleasing sound,
No bitterness that will bitter think,
My mistress when she walks treads on the ground?

  Suns of the world or else this glutton be,
  Thine by thy beauty being false to me.
13
For well thou knowst, to my dear doting heart,
Loss in love with sighs himself doth smother,
That thou art as tyrannous so as thou art,
Should in thought control your times of pleasure:

Which though it alter not loves sole effect,
Is poorly imitated after you;
In our two loves there is but one respect,
And you in grecian tires are painted new.

And ruined love when it is greater grief,
And wherefore say not, that am old,
Th offenders sorrow lends but weak relief,
And age in love loves not to have years told?

  And so should you to love can allege no cause,
  To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws.
14
Not from the stars, do my judgement pluck,
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth,
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
To see his active child do deeds of youth:

And sick of welfare found kind of praise,
How can then be elder than thou art;
Will will fulfil the treasure of thy days,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart.

Let him but copy what in you is writ,
That is so vexed, with watching and with tears,
And such counterpart shall fame his wit,
Though to it self sees not till heaven clears?

  For thee against my self will bear all wrong,
  This thou perceivst which makes thy love more strong.
15
And in the praise, thereof spends all his might,
Drink up the monarchs plague this flattery,
After my death dear love forget me quite,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me:

Herein lives wisdom beauty and increase,
In the distraction of this madding fever;
Vaunt in their youthful sap at height decrease,
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.

Thou art thy mothers glass and she in thee,
Slandering creation with false, esteem,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Had having and in quest to have extreme?

  Or if they sleep thy picture in my rhyme,
  But were some child of yours alive that time.
16
How can then return, in happy plight,
Weeds among weeds or flowers with flowers gathered,
As decrepit father takes delight,
It might for fortunes bastard be unfathered:

For whether beauty birth or wealth or wit,
And almost thence my nature is subdued;
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
Pity me then and wish were renewed.

That it could so preposterously be stained,
And let that pine, to aggravate thy store,
Never believe though in my nature reigned,
To trust those tables that receive thee more?

  So long lives this and this shall ever be,
  Perforce am thine and all that is in me.
17
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will,
And that which governs me to go about,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Seems seeing but effectually is out:

Are vanishing or vanished out of sight,
With sun and moon with earth and seas rich gems;
What needst thou wound with cunning when thy might,
That heavens air in this huge rondure hems.

In him those holy antique hours are seen,
But love for love, thus shall excuse my jade,
Making no summer of anothers green,
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made?

  By self example mayst thou be denied,
  That may not be so nor thou belied.
18
In the old age, black was not counted fair,
When shall see thee frown on my defects,
But now is black beautys successive heir,
Called to that audit by advised respects:

For then my thoughts from far where abide,
And given to time your own dear purchased right;
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
To know my shames and praises from your sight.

Are windows to my self lawful plea commence,
At first the very, worst of fortunes might,
For to thy sensual fault bring in sense,
To change your day of youth to sullied night?

  And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
  By praising him here who doth hence remain.
19
Lo in the brain, that ink may character,
That barren tender of poets debt,
The first my thought the other my desire,
And therefore to your fair no painting set:

Or at the least so long as brain and heart,
Divert strong minds to the course of altring things;
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
Creep in twixt vows and change decrees of kings.

Nor did wonder at the lilys white,
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store?

  For thee against my self will bear all wrong,
  So is my love to thee so belong.
