That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
Now is the time that face should form another,
Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled:
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
Who for thy self art so unprovident.
In one of thine, from that which thou departest,
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night,
No longer yours, than you your self here live,
And yet methinks I have astronomy,
Holds in perfection but a little moment.
Make war upon this bloody tyrant Time?
If it were filled with your most high deserts?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood,
Hast thou the master mistress of my passion,
Stirred by a painted beauty to his verse,
So long as youth and thou are of one date,
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart,
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit;
The dear respose for limbs with travel tired,
That am debarred the benefit of rest?
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
I summon up remembrance of things past,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
When that churl death my bones with dust shall cover
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud,
Although our undivided loves are one:
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
While thou dost breathe that pour'st into my verse,
When thou art all the better part of me?
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly,
For all the day they view things unrespected,
Injurious distance should not stop my way,
Are both with thee, wherever I abide,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight,
And each doth good turns now unto the other,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
When what I seek (my weary travel's end)
Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed,
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
So do our minutes hasten to their end,
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
And all my soul, and all my every part;
With Time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn,
The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age,
But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
As to behold desert a beggar born,
And with his presence grace impiety,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair,
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
What merit lived in me that you should love
When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
Without all bail shall carry me away,
Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground;
So far from variation or quick change?
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste,
And found such fair assistance in my verse,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten,
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
And therefore to your fair no painting set,
Than this rich praise, that you alone, are you?
While comments of your praise richly compiled,
Bound for the prize of (all too precious) you,
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate,
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
And I will comment upon that offence,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
Like a deceived husband, so love's face,
That do not do the thing, they most do show,
Which like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport,
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
When proud-pied April (dressed in all his trim)
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
I love not less, though less the show appear,
That having such a scope to show her pride,
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come,
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify,
And made my self a motley to the view,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow,
And that which governs me to go about,
Drink up the monarch's plague this flattery?
Even those that said I could not love you dearer,
Admit impediments, love is not love
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
With eager compounds we our palate urge,
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within,
And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
When not to be, receives reproach of being,
Full charactered with lasting memory,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
It might for Fortune's bastard be unfathered,
With my extern the outward honouring,
Or if it were it bore not beauty's name:
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
Is lust in action, and till action, lust
Coral is far more red, than her lips red,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me;
And I my self am mortgaged to thy will,
And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in over-plus,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will',
That they behold and see not what they see?
I do believe her though I know she lies,
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart,
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain:
For they in thee a thousand errors note,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving,
One of her feathered creatures broke away,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still,
Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate',
My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Which have no correspondence with true sight,
When I against my self with thee partake?
With insufficiency my heart to sway,
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
But thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing,
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
His tender heir might bear his memory:
Will be a tattered weed of small worth held:
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
And being frank she lends to those are free:
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:
With beauty's treasure ere it be self-killed:
Serving with looks his sacred majesty,
Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife,
But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
Thou mayst call thine, when thou from youth convertest,
And sable curls all silvered o'er with white:
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality,
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment.
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts:
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
And burn the long-lived phoenix, in her blood,
With shifting change as is false women's fashion,
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
Then look I death my days should expiate.
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
And perspective it is best painter's art.
Unlooked for joy in that I honour most;
To witness duty, not to show my wit.
To work my mind, when body's work's expired.
But day by night and night by day oppressed.
And look upon my self and curse my fate,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
And all those friends which I thought buried.
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover:
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy:
Hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke?
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more:
For still temptation follows where thou art.
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay,
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
My heart, mine eye the freedom of that right,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother;
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
Called to that audit by advised respects,
'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend.'
Till I return of posting is no need.
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
And you but one, can every shadow lend:
For that sweet odour, which doth in it live:
Than unswept stone, besmeared with sluttish time.
To-morrow sharpened in his former might.
Nor services to do till you require.
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure.
The second burthen of a former child!
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
With lines and wrinkles, when his youthful morn
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage.
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And lace it self with his society?
Or durst inhabit on a living brow:
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
For you in me can nothing worthy prove.
Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
And under thee their poesy disperse.
And my sick muse doth give an other place.
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame.
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
That barren tender of a poet's debt:
Which should example where your equal grew.
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn:
Against thy reasons making no defence.
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse.
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow:
O in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
Thou mak'st faults graces, that to thee resort:
What old December's bareness everywhere!
That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him.
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
So dost thou too, and therein dignified:
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
Than when it hath my added praise beside.
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights,
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
Made old offences of affections new.
Than public means which public manners breeds.
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?
Seems seeing, but effectually is out:
And that your love taught it this alchemy?
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer,
Or bends with the remover to remove.
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge.
Still losing when I saw my self to win!
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel.
Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing.
Beyond all date even to eternity.
They are but dressings Of a former sight:
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gathered.
Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
And beauty slandered with a bastard shame,
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head:
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Thus far for love, my love-suit sweet fulfil.
Yet what the best is, take the worst to be.
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
Use power with power, and slay me not by art,
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote.
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving,
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay:
The worser spirit a woman coloured ill.
But when she saw my woeful state,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Th' uncertain sickly appetite to please:
That censures falsely what they see aright?
Am of my self, all-tyrant, for thy sake?
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove.
In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground:
Came tripping by, but in her maiden hand,
