Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
To hideous winter and confounds him there,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
By unions married do offend thine ear,
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
Without this folly, age, and cold decay,
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd
Find no determination, then you were
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky:
And many maiden gardens yet unset,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed,
And do whate'er thou wilt swift-footed Time
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth,
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems:
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
To find where your true image pictured lies,
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it;
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
And though they be outstripped by every pen,
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Or any of these all, or all, or more
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed.
Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her,
How would thy shadow's form, form happy show,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee,
In tender embassy of love to thee,
(A closet never pierced with crystal eyes)
And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Since seldom coming in that long year set,
Is poorly imitated after you,
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
Whilst I (my sovereign) watch the clock for you,
Th' imprisoned absence of your liberty,
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned,
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
No shape so true, no truth of such account,
And all those beauties whereof now he's king
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
Against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And steal dead seeming of his living hue?
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own,
Thy worth the greater being wooed of time,
The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
The very part was consecrate to thee,
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory,
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
Though I (once gone) to all the world must die,
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
That you your self being extant well might show,
That to his subject lends not some small glory,
And like unlettered clerk still cry Amen,
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
And for that riches where is my deserving?
Upon thy part I can set down a story
To set a form upon desired change,
Come in the rearward of a conquered woe,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest,
When in the least of them my life hath end,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change,
And husband nature's riches from expense,
(Making lascivious comments on thy sport)
The basest jewel will be well esteemed:
The teeming autumn big with rich increase,
Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
In gentle numbers time so idly spent,
'Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed,
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
Look in your glass and there appears a face,
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage,
I must each day say o'er the very same,
Like him that travels I return again,
Askance and strangely: but by all above,
And almost thence my nature is subdued
To know my shames and praises from your tongue,
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch,
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
And given to time your own dear-purchased right,
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
Whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never!
As I by yours, y'have passed a hell of time,
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Have faculty by nature to subsist,
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Lose all, and more by paying too much rent
Fairing the foul with art's false borrowed face,
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
But no such roses see I in her cheeks,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed,
For thou art covetous, and he is kind,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one,
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Dear heart forbear to glance thine eye aside,
Though not to love, yet love to tell me so,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent,
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept
What means the world to say it is not so?
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds,
My nobler part to my gross body's treason,
When I break twenty? I am perjured most,
A dateless lively heat still to endure,
Which many legions of true hearts had warmed,
Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
Of his self-love to stop posterity?
So great a sum of sums yet canst not live?
Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
Or ten times happier be it ten for one,
Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear:
By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
Which to repair should be thy chief desire:
And threescore year would make the world away:
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard:
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
By oft predict that I in heaven find.
And wear their brave state out of memory.
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
Such heavenly touches ne'er touched earthly faces.
By chance, or nature's changing course untrimmed:
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime,
Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
How can I then be elder than thou art?
O'ercharged with burthen of mine own love's might:
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes:
For at a frown they in their glory die.
In thy soul's thought (all naked) will bestow it:
Looking on darkness which the blind do see.
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
With what I most enjoy contented least,
And moan th' expense of many a vanished sight.
But things removed that hidden in thee lie.
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are:
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
I make my love engrafted to this store:
When thou thy self dost give invention light?
That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone:
By wilful taste of what thy self refusest.
Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed?
Suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her.
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
As soon as think the place where he would be.
Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy.
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part.
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
His rider loved not speed being made from thee:
In winged speed no motion shall I know,
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
The living record of your memory.
The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness:
When you have bid your servant once adieu.
Without accusing you of injury.
Since mind at first in character was done.
And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound.
The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
As I all other in all worths surmount.
Stealing away the treasure of his spring:
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store.
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays?
And strength by limping sway disabled
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
Death's second self that seals up all in rest.
My spirit is thine the better part of me,
Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure,
Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
And given grace a double majesty.
He robs thee of, and pays it thee again,
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie,
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
That you are you, so dignifies his story.
In polished form of well refined pen.
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
And so my patent back again is swerving.
That thou in losing me, shalt win much glory:
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange:
To linger out a purposed overthrow.
All these I better in one general best.
Than that, which on thy humour doth depend.
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.
Others, but stewards of their excellence:
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
To truths translated, and for true things deemed.
Like widowed wombs after their lords' decease:
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
But best is best, if never intermixed'?
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
Since first I saw you fresh which yet are green.
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
Even such a beauty as you master now.
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name.
So that my self bring water for my stain,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
Pity me then, and wish I were renewed,
That my steeled sense or changes right or wrong.
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch:
As fast as objects to his beams assemble:
Divert strong minds to the course of alt'ring things:
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
In the distraction of this madding fever!
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
Of thee, thy record never can be missed:
Than think that we before have heard them told:
Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls:
Pitiful thrivers in their gazing spent?
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand.
On purpose laid to make the taker mad.
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
Although I swear it to my self alone.
Doth half that glory to the sober west
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be crossed:
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind.
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
Among a number one is reckoned none.
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
Is more than my o'erpressed defence can bide?
No news but health from their physicians know.
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
Robbed others' beds' revenues of their rents.
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And taught it thus anew to greet:
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end?
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no,
Revenge upon my self with present moan?
That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds?
Triumph in love, flesh stays no farther reason,
And all my honest faith in thee is lost.
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure:
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarmed.
