Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
This were to be new made when thou art old,
But if thou live remembered not to be,
Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
But flowers distilled though they with winter meet,
Be not self-willed for thou art much too fair,
So thou, thy self out-going in thy noon:
Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
No love toward others in that bosom sits
Make thee another self for love of me,
She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
O none but unthrifts, dear my love you know,
Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
And all in war with Time for love of you,
To give away your self, keeps your self still,
But were some child of yours alive that time,
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
Yet do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure,
Let them say more that like of hearsay well,
Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
O learn to read what silent love hath writ,
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
Then happy I that love and am beloved
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee,
Lo thus by day my limbs, by night my mind,
But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings,
But if the while I think on thee (dear friend)
Their images I loved, I view in thee,
But since he died and poets better prove,
Yet him for this, my love no whit disdaineth,
Ah but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
That I an accessary needs must be,
But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
Look what is best, that best I wish in thee,
If my slight muse do please these curious days,
And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
But here's the joy, my friend and I are one,
All days are nights to see till I see thee,
Receiving nought by elements so slow,
This told, I joy, but then no longer glad,
As thus, mine eye's due is thy outward part,
Or if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
To leave poor me, thou hast the strength of laws,
For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
In all external grace you have some part,
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
So till the judgment that your self arise,
Or call it winter, which being full of care,
So true a fool is love, that in your will,
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
O sure I am the wits of former days,
And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand
For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
'Tis thee (my self) that for my self I praise,
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
This thought is as a death which cannot choose
O none, unless this miracle have might,
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
O him she stores, to show what wealth she had,
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
The worth of that, is that which it contains,
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
For as the sun is daily new and old,
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
But thou art all my art, and dost advance
Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
You still shall live (such virtue hath my pen)
And their gross painting might be better used,
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes,
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
Then others, for the breath of words respect,
But when your countenance filled up his line,
Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter,
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take,
But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds,
Take heed (dear heart) of this large privilege,
But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
Yet seemed it winter still, and you away,
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
Then do thy office Muse, I teach thee how,
Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue:
And more, much more than in my verse can sit,
For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred,
Fair, kind, and true, have often lived alone.
For we which now behold these present days,
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
For nothing this wide universe I call,
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
Pity me then dear friend, and I assure ye,
You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
Incapable of more, replete with you,
If it be poisoned, 'tis the lesser sin,
Love is a babe, then might I not say so
If this be error and upon me proved,
Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
So I return rebuked to my content,
But that your trespass now becomes a fee,
Unless this general evil they maintain,
To keep an adjunct to remember thee
This I do vow and this shall ever be,
To this I witness call the fools of time,
Hence, thou suborned informer, a true soul
Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
All this the world well knows yet none knows well,
And yet by heaven I think my love as rare,
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
And yet thou wilt, for I being pent in thee,
Him have I lost, thou hast both him and me,
Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill,
Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
Yet do not so, but since I am near slain,
That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
So will I pray that thou mayst have thy Will,
Yet this shall I ne'er know but live in doubt,
'I hate', from hate away she threw,
So shall thou feed on death, that feeds on men,
For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
O cunning love, with tears thou keep'st me blind,
But love hate on for now I know thy mind,
If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
No want of conscience hold it that I call,
For I have sworn thee fair: more perjured I,
But found no cure, the bath for my help lies,
Came there for cure and this by that I prove,
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.
Die single and thine image dies with thee.
Which used lives th' executor to be.
Leese but their show, their substance still lives sweet.
To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.
Unlooked on diest unless thou get a son.
Sings this to thee, 'Thou single wilt prove none'.
That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
Save breed to brave him, when he takes thee hence.
You had a father, let your son say so.
Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.
As he takes from you, I engraft you new.
And you must live drawn by your own sweet skill.
You should live twice in it, and in my rhyme.
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.
I will not praise that purpose not to sell.
Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.
To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.
They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
Where I may not remove nor be removed.
Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
For thee, and for my self, no quiet find.
And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger
That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
All losses are restored, and sorrows end.
And thou (all they) hast all the all of me.
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.
Suns of the world may stain, when heaven's sun staineth.
And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
This wish I have, then ten times happy me.
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
By praising him here who doth hence remain.
Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.
Thine by thy beauty being false to me.
Sweet flattery, then she loves but me alone.
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.
I send them back again and straight grow sad.
And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.
Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight.
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.
Since why to love, I can allege no cause.
My grief lies onward and my joy behind.
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.
Being had to triumph, being lacked to hope.
But you like none, none you for constant heart.
When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.
You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.
Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.
(Though you do any thing) he thinks no ill.
Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
From me far off, with others all too near.
Painting my age with beauty of thy days.
And they shall live, and he in them still green.
But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
Save that to die, I leave my love alone.
In days long since, before these last so bad.
To show false Art what beauty was of yore.
The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
And mock you with me after I am gone.
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.
And that is this, and this with thee remains.
Or gluttoning on all, or all away.
So is my love still telling what is told.
Shall profit thee, and much enrich thy book.
As high as learning, my rude ignorance.
Since what he owes thee, thou thy self dost pay.
The worst was this, my love was my decay.
Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.
Where cheeks need blood, in thee it is abused.
Than both your poets can in praise devise.
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.
Then lacked I matter, that enfeebled mine.
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
That for thy right, my self will bear all wrong.
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.
Compared with loss of thee, will not seem so.
All this away, and me most wretchcd make.
Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.
If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.
Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.
The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
As with your shadow I with these did play.
So thou prevent'st his scythe, and crooked knife.
To make him seem long hence, as he shows now.
Because I would not dull you with my song.
Your own glass shows you, when you look in it.
Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.
Which three till now, never kept seat in one.
Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.
Where time and outward form would show it dead.
Save thou my rose, in it thou art my all.
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.
That all the world besides methinks are dead.
My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.
To give full growth to that which still doth grow.
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.
The constancy and virtue of your love.
Drugs poison him that so feil sick of you.
And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent.
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.
All men are bad and in their badness reign.
Were to import forgetfulness in me.
I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.
Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.
When most impeached, stands least in thy control.
That every tongue says beauty should look so.
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
As any she belied with false compare.
And thence this slander as I think proceeds.
And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
Perforce am thine and all that is in me.
He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.
Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'
And then thou lov'st me for my name is Will.
And to this false plague are they now transferred.
And in our faults by lies we flattered be.
Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.
That she that makes me sin, awards me pain.
By self-example mayst thou be denied.
If thou turn back and my loud crying still.
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
And saved my life saying 'not you'.
And death once dead, there's no more dying then.
Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.
Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.
More worthy I to be beloved of thee.
Her love, for whose dear love I rise and fall.
To swear against the truth so foul a be.
Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes.
Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.
